06601030305800
1
2#
F0110030
R   [................................................]001
9[...................................................]001
ÅCHAPTER1

THEMIDDLEENGLISHHUNTINGMANUALSÄ


TheMiddleEnglishhuntingmanualsformedpartofasubstantial
bodyofhuntingliteratureinseveralEuropeanvernaculars.
AlthoughrelatedtotheirEuropeancounterparts,theMiddle
Englishtextsdevelopedinadifferentdirection.Theyemphasise
differentaspectsofhuntingactivity,andreflectdifferent
socialattitudestowardsthehunt.Ingeneral,theContinental
huntingtextsaremarkedbyagreateremphasisonutilitarian
detailthanwefindintheMiddleEnglishmanuals.Theydonot
shirkfromrepresentingproceduresfortrapping,snaringand
poisoninganimals-allofwhichtheEnglishwritersshunas
ignobleactivitiesnotworthyofthehunter.TheEnglishmanuals
concentrateonthenoblehuntfor'beastsofvenery'-thehart,
hareandboar-andgenerallyonthehuntÑparforceÄ:onhorseback
usinghounds.TheContinentalmanualsgiveagooddealofuseful
practicalinstruction,buttheEnglishtextsfocusonthe
peripheral,socialdetailsoflanguage,ritualprocedure,horn
musicandhuntingcries.TheFrenchmanualscouldteachamanhow
tohunt;theEnglishmanualstaughthuntsmenhowtoappear
gentlemen.


ÅThefourbooksofhuntingÄ

TherearefourMiddleEnglishhuntingmanualssurviving,though
evidencesuggestsothershavebeenlost.ê15,1ÄTheearliestofthe
extantEnglishtextsisonlythesecondearliestinanyEuropean
N001:004000290015
ÄÑIssuesoftheExchequer;beingaCollectionofPaymentsMade
outofHisMajesty'sRevenuefromKingHenryIIItoKingHenry
VIInclusiveÄ,editedbyF.Devon(London,1837)recordsa
paymentfromtheexchequerfortwelvehuntingmanuals:

21stNovember[1396]-TotheLordtheKing,inhischamber
[HenryV].Inmoneypaidintothesaidchamberbythehands
ofJohnRobard,ofLondon,scrivener,forwritingtwelvebooks
onhunting,fortheuseofthesaidLordtheKing,and
deliveredintothechamberaforesaid,bythesaidKing's
command,-12ÑlÄ.8ÑsÄ.

p.368


E
ˇÄvernacular.ê07,2ÄTheÑArtofVeneryÄbyWilliamTwiciorTwiti,
huntsmantoEdwardII,survivesinbothAnglo-NormanandEnglish
versions.ê05,3ÄItisashortprosetreatise(sevenpagesinprint)
thatglancesataspectsofseveraldifferenthuntsbutdealswith
noneingreatdetail.Itgivesmiscellaneousinformationrelating
tothehuntintheformofadialoguebetweenamasterhuntsman
andhispupil.Thesubjectmatterislargelyofatheoretical
nature:thenicetiesofterminology,theclassificationof
animals,namingconventions,thepreparationoftherewardfor
thehoundsfromvariousquarry,andthehorncallsandhunting
criesusedinthedifferentchases.Itisajumbledtextonall
levels,fromtheorganisationofthesubjectmattertothe
sentencestructure.Itshowslittleregardforthelogical
connectionofadjacentitems;theorganisationseemsinsteadto
reflecttheorderinwhichtopicsmightoccurtothespeakersof
thedialogue-orperhapsdidoccurtothewriter.

ThenexttwoMiddleEnglishhuntingmanuals,theÑMasterofGameÄ
andtheÑBokeofHuntyngÄ,seemtohavebeenwrittenataboutthe
sametime.TheÑMasterofGameÄbyEdwardPlantagenet,secondDuke
ofYork,waswrittenbetween1406and1413.ê04,4ÄItisa
translationofselectedchaptersfromGastonPhoebus'sÑLivrede
chasseÄ,itselfderivedfromtheÑLivreduRoyModusetdelaRoyne
RatioÄ.ê05,5ÄThethirty-onechaptersfromÑLivredechasseÄdescribe
the'nature'ofthebeastsfoundinEngland,thetypesandcare
ofhounds,andhowto'goinquest'forthehart.TheDuke
omittedthechaptersontrapping,ontheconductofthehuntsand
onanimalsnotfoundinEngland,butaddedfivenewchapters,
includinglivelyandcomprehensiveaccountsofthehuntsfordeer
andhareinastylewhichcametocharacterisetheEnglish
traditionofhuntingmanuals.HealsoadaptedGastonPhoebus's
N002:001100310007
ÄTheearliestmedievalmanualistheLatinÑDeartebersandiÄ,
writtenbefore1250byGuicenna(n)s;editedbyGunnar
Tilander,Cynegetica3(Uppsala,1956).Thefirstina
EuropeanvernacularisÑLaChacedoucerfÄ,fromc.1250;edited
byGunnarTilander,Cynegetica7(Stockholm,1960).


N003:000900330005
ÄBothtextsareeditedbyGunnarTilander,ÑLaVeneriede
TwitiÄ,Cynegetica2(Karlshamn,1956).HereaftertheAnglo-
NormantextisreferredtoasÑLVÄ,theMiddleEnglishtextas
ÑAVÄ.

N004:004300510004
ÄEdwardPlantagenet,2ndDukeofYork,ÑTheMasterofGameÄ,
editedbyW.A.andF.Baillie-Grohman(London,1904).
HereafterÑMGÄ.

N005:000600540005
ÄÑLesLivresduRoyModusetdelaRoyneRatioÄ,editedbyGunnar
Tilander,SATF,2vols(Paris,1932),hereafterÑRMÄ.Gaston
Phebus,ÑLivredechasseÄ,editedbyGunnarTilander,
Cynegetica18(Karlshamn,1971),hereafterÑLCÄ.

E
Äprologuetoreflecthisowncircumstances.Initsusualorder,
thetextfallseasilyintoafour-partstructure:tenchapterson
differentanimals,tenchaptersonhounds,twelvechapterson
techniquesandprocedures,andthreechaptersontheconductof
thehunt.ê04,6Ä

ÑTheBokeofHuntyngÄ,betterknownasthesecondtreatiseinthe
ÑBokeofStAlbansÄ,waswrittenearlyinthefifteenthcentury.ê08,7Ä
TheÑBokeÄiswide-ranginginitssubjectmatter,including
informationonthecategorisationofanimals,terminology,hunts
forthehart,hare,boar,roedeerandbuck,'breaking'(cutting
up)thecarcassofthedeerandboar,andvariousother
miscellaneousitems.Mostofthetextispresentedintheformof
aversemonologuebya'dame'instructingherchildren,butsome
materialisgivenasadialoguebetweena'master'andhis'man'.
Itispoorlyarranged,andhasnologicalstructure:consecutive
subjectsareoftenunrelatedandsomematerialisrepeated.The
materialappearsinadifferentorderintheBokeofStAlbans
andeachofthetwomanuscriptversions.

Itwasnotuncommoninthefourteenthandfifteenthcenturiesfor
suchfactualworkstoappearinverse.ê05,8ÄAlthoughtheversemay
havehadslightmnemonicvalue,themetreisoftenunevenand
sometimesdifficult,andtherhymewordsarefrequentlytagsor
incidentalphraseswhichwouldhavebeenoflittleuseasanÑaide
memoireÄ.Itseemslikelythattheverseformwasintendedtolend
thetexttheairofauthorityandformality,orperhapssimply
makethematerialmorepalatable.Other'literary'featuresare
thefictitious'characters'ofdameandchild,masterandman,
andthereferencetotheauthorityofTristanintheopening
lines:

Wheresoeveryefarebyfrythorbyfell,
MyderechyldetakehedehowTristramdoothyoutell(lines1-2)

N006:000900660004
ÄTwogroupsofmanuscriptsreorderthematerial,onepresenting
thechaptersintheorder1-11,26-36,12-25andtheotherin
theorder1-11,26-36,12-18,20,19,21-25.

N007:006200690008
ÄÑTheBokeofHuntyngÄ,seeÑEnglishHuntingandHawkinginThe
BokeofStAlbansÄ,editedbyRachelHands(Oxford,1975)
(facsimile)orÑJuliansBarnes,BokeofHuntyngÄ,editedby
GunnarTilander,Cynegetica11(Karlshamn,1964).Theearlier
manuscriptcopyoftheÑBokeofHuntyngÄdatesfromc1400,
thoughtheÑBokeofStAlbansÄwasnotpublisheduntil1486.


N008:003800830005
ÄSuchprosaicsubjetsashorticultureandevenblood-letting
weresimilarlytreatedinverse,andtheuseofversefor
practicaltextscontinuedwellintothesixteenthcentury,as
inTusser'sÑAHundredthGoodPointesofHusbandrieÄ(1557).

E
ÄTheÑBokeofHuntyngÄisthemostpuzzlingandperhapstheleast
satisfactoryoftheMiddleEnglishhuntingmanuals.Thetwo
narrativeframeworksofthemaster/mandialogueandthedame's
monologueareintegratedonlyinthemostrudimentaryfashionby
theconsistentverseform.Thejumbledorderofthematerial
furtherunderminesthetext'spretensions.The'literary'
featuresmighthaveenhancedtheworkifithadbeencompetently
executedonthemostbasiclevel,buttheyareinsufficient-and
inthecaseofthemixeddramaticsituations,counterproductive-
asunifyingprinciplesthemselves.

ThelastMiddleEnglishmanual,theÑTretyseoffHuntyngÄ,ismore
difficulttodate.ê04,9ÄProbablywrittenduringthemid-orlate
fifteenthcentury,itgivesdetailsofthehuntsforthehare,
hart,buck,roedeerandfox,describesthebreakingofthedeer's
carcass,presentsmiscellaneousquestionsandanswers,and
describestheideal'shape'ofagreyhound.Theaccountsofthe
differenthuntsarepresentedinanarrative-likeform,giving
thehuntingcriesandhorncallstouseatvariousstagesand
followingthesequenceofthehuntfromkenneltokill.

TheÑTretyseÄisinmanywaysmoreorganisedthantheBokeandthe
ÑArtofVeneryÄ,thoughtherearefrequentlapsesinits
organisation.Theseriesofinstructionsforthevarioushunts
arecomparable,andmostsectionsareintroducedbyatitle.The
miscellaneousmatterislargelycollectedtogetherinthe
untitledseriesofquestionsratherthan,asintheothertwo
texts,scatteredthroughout.Asareferencework,itismore
usefulandcoherentthaneitheroftheothertwo,anditis
fairlyeasytofindinformationinit.

Thislasttextiswhollyindependentoftheothers,butthe
earliermanualsareinter-related.Therearetwoversionsofthe
ÑArtofVeneryÄ,thelaterversioncontainingalongaccountonthe
hare-huntwhichalsoappearsintheÑMasterofGameÄandtheÑBoke
ofHuntyngÄ.Itisnotpossibletotellwhichtexthastheprior
claimonthematerial.Theprocessofborrowingandcopying
betweentextsextendedtore-issuingtextsasnewworks.TheÑArt
ofVeneryÄwasadaptedandappearedinthefifteenthcenturyas
theÑCraftofVeneryÄ.ê03,10ÄTheÑBokeofHuntyngÄwasusedinthe
ÑBokeofStAlbansÄ,andthiswasinturnreissuedunderdifferent
titleswithonlysuperficialalterationsthreetimesinthe
N009:001801090004
ÄÑTheTretyseoffHuntyngÄ,editedbyAnneRooney,Scripta:
MedievalandRenaissancetextsandstudies,no.19(Brussels,
1987).

N010:002001360003
ÄTheÑCraftofVeneryÄisprintedinGunnarTilander'seditionof
ÑAVÄ;hereafterÑCVÄ.

E
ˇÄsixteenthandearlyseventeenthcenturies.ê07,11Ä

Thecontentsofthemanualsisoftensurprising.Inmanyareas
wherewemightexpectanextendedtreatment,theylackclear,
detailedandusefulinstructions,andthebalanceofmaterialis
rarelyinfavourofthepracticallyuseful.EventheÑMasterof
GameÄ,followingthelucidandpreciseÑLivredechasseÄ,omitssome
oftheFrenchdetailsofthehunt'sprocedureandreplacesthem
withanarrativeaccountofatypecharacteristicoftheEnglish
treatises.AlthoughGastonPhoebushadbeencarefultoexplain
almosteverypointofprocedureindetail,theDukeofYorkgives
adequate,butrarelyprolonged,explanations,andtheother
MiddleEnglishtreatisesgivelittleornone.Indeed,theother
treatisesappearnowtobevirtuallyuselessaspracticaltexts,
givingnoneofthedetailswewouldexpect:whichhoundsareused
ineachchase?aretheyallreleasedatonce?whichweapons
shouldthehuntercarry?howshouldhedress?inwhattypeof
terraincanheexpecttofindeachkindofanimal?TheÑMasterof
GameÄanswerssomeofthesequestionsbuttheothermanualsare
largelysilentonsuchmatters.Insteadtheyconcentrateonmore
esotericandlesspracticalconsiderations.Theproper
terminologyapplicabletovariousstagesofthehunt,andto
describingtheanimalanditsactivities,isgiven
disproportionateimportance.Similarly,theclassificationofthe
animalsplaysaprominentpartalthoughthevariouscriteriaby
whichtheyaregroupedhavenoapparentpracticalapplications.
Inpartsofallthemanuals,andthroughouttheÑTretyseoff
HuntynÄg,thesequencesofhornsignalsandhuntingcriestobe
usedisamajorpreoccupation.Thebodyofscatteredand
miscellaneousmanuscriptmaterialrelatingtothehuntis
likewiseconcernedwithterminology,classificationandhorn
calls.Allthisinformationis,strictlyspeaking,unnecessary.
Ithasnoplaceinhuntingwhenremovedfromtheparticular
cultureforwhichthemanualswerewritten.Thedetailswith
whichthemanualsconcernthemselvesarethefeaturesofthe
medievalchasewhichmadeitcourtlyandnon-utilitarian.But
thiswasnotthecasewiththeFrenchtextsonwhichtheEnglish
traditiondrew.


ÅFrenchpracticalityandEnglishsnobberyÄ

BecausetheÑMasterofGameÄistranslatedfromaFrenchwork,we
havearecordofhowtheEnglishwritersawhisownrequirements
differingfromthoseofaFrenchhuntsman.Aglanceatthe
N011:004201390007
ÄGervaseMarkham,ÑTheGentleman'sAcademie.OftheBokeofSt
Albans.ReducedintoaBetterMethodÄ(1595);William
Gryndall,ÑHawking,Hunting,FoulingandFishingÄ(1596),
facsimilebyTheEnglishExperience,no.463(Amsterdam,
1972);T.S.,ÑAJewelforGentrieÄ(1614),facsimilebyThe
EnglishExperience,no.890(Amsterdam,1977).

E
ÄchangestheDukeofYorkmadewhenadaptinghissourcereveals
howheperceivedthedifferences.

ThetranslatedchaptersoftheÑMasterofGameÄusuallyfollowthe
sourcecloselyandaccuratelywiththeoccasionaladditionofan
explanatoryorqualifyingphrase.Wheretherearevariationsand
additions,theseservevariousfunctions.Someadditionsadvise
oncorrectEnglishterminology;othersanglicisethetext,
removingorexplainingreferencestoforeignpracticesand
changingreferencestodetailsofquotidianlifetoreflect
Englishcustoms.

ThealterationsandtheoriginalchaptersrevealhowEnglish
huntingpracticedifferedfromFrench,andshowwhatEnglish
hunterconsidereditthedutyofamanualtoteach,andwhichthe
Frenchneglected.Forexample,theEnglishwriteremphasises
thenobilityandspecialstatusofthehunt.Huntingasanoble
courtlyartrejectedmanyprocedureswhichmay,toanuninitiated
reader,seemtorepresentlegitimatehuntingpractices.TheDuke
ofYorkmakesclearthattheEnglishdistinguishbetweenhunting
andtrapping,consideringthelatterlessnobleandinappropriate
toagentleman:

Menslehareswi˛greyhoundesandwithrennynghoundesby
strengthe,asinEngelonde,butelliswhere˛eisleehem,Also
withsmalepocketesandwithpurs[n]etesandwithsmalenettis
wi˛harepipesandwithlongnettis...TrewelyItrowethatagood
hunteruoldslehemsofornogood.(p.14)(Italicisedtextis
notderivedfromLivredechasse.)

Heomitsthechaptersontrappinggame,alongwiththoseon
beastshedoesnotconsidersufficientlynoble.Heisalso
concernedwithpropriety;hedoesnotgivefullinstructionson
undoingthehart(cuttingupitscarcass),becausethisisa
skillnotappropriatetoahuntsman:

vndohym˛emoostwoodmanly...wondred#enot˛atysaywoodmanly
foritisapoynt˛atlonge˛toawoodmannyscraftand˛oughit
bewelsittyngtoanhunterfortocvndonit,neuer˛elatterit
longe˛moortowodemannyscraft˛antohunders.p.100

Themostinterestingofthepre-occupationsoftheEnglish
huntingmanuals,theconcernwithterminology,isparticularly
importantinmarkingthesocialdistinctiontheDukeofYork
pointstointhispassage.Thelanguageofthehunt,and
especiallythesocialstatusofthenoblehunter,willemergeas
importantfeaturesoftheliterarytreatmentsofthehuntwe
shalllookatlater.Itissignificant(thoughhardlysurprising)
thatthesameconcernsshouldappearinboththehuntingmanuals
andimaginativeliterature,andclearlyindicatesamajor
characteristicofthewayinwhichhuntingwasviewedbymedieval
Englishsociety.


Å'Markwellthesetermsfollowing'Ä

Thelanguageofthehuntperformedasociallydivisivefunction
andrenderedthehuntelitist,aclosedbooktotheuninitiated.
Allfourofthehuntingtreatisespayasmuchattentiontothe
correctnamesofthingsastotheirnature.SotheÑTretyseÄpauses
toexplainaterm:

ﬁen˛emaysterowethtosendafterhismen&hisueanters.so
shallhesayhym:'Goethwodethyowther#ewene˛atbestbe,
where˛ehertwyllcome',andassoneas˛eybewodedherryght
nameisclepyt'ueanters'.(lines133-6)


AndthroughouttheÑBokeofHuntyngÄ,thedameexhortsherpupilsto
usethecorrectnames,thoughherinsistenceisincorporatedinto
thetagsandisnotintrusive:

Mysonnys,whereyewalke,callyehemso.
Soyeshuldenaamesichdere,
AnddoasIyowlere.(lines62-4)

SomeoftheadditionstheDukeofYorkmadetothetextofÑLivre
dechasseÄintroduceEnglishterminology.Whilemanyaresimple
observationsaddedunobtrusivelytothetext,othersareextended
interpolationsgivingafullaccountofappropriateterminology,
asaretheaccountsoftheagesofthehartandthe
structureofthehart'santlers.However,theÑMasterofGameÄ
differsfromtheotherEnglishmanualsinthatitdoesnotmerely
presentthenewterminology,buttacklesthewiderissueof
interestinthevocabulary,explainingtheimportanceoflearning
thecorrectterms:

Andalso˛at[thehunter]bebo˛afeeldeandatwoodedelyuered
andweleyedandwelavisedofhisspecheandofhistermysand
euergladtolerneand˛athebenoboostournejangelere.(p.69)

Althoughatonepoint,theauthorglossesaFrenchterm(ÑquestÄ,
p.73),heiskeentopreservetheintegrityofthenativeEnglish
huntingvocabulary.Thefollowingpassagebothrevealshis
concerntoretaintheEnglishtermsandshowsthathesawsome
intrinsicinterestinterminology;theseFrenchtermsarenot
recountedforuse,hesays,butbecausetheymaybeinteresting
inthemselves:

ne˛eleesIwoldnotsette˛isinmynbokeforasmocheasIwold
Englisshehunterscou˛ensomdeleof˛etermys˛athuntersvsyn
bi#ond˛eseebutnotto˛atententetocalleitsoin
Engelonde.(p.74)

Heclarifiestheterminology,explainingnewtermsasthey
appear:

˛edeerbenliklytofalleindaunger,˛atistosayamongother
Ädere.(p.95)

oonof˛ebeernersshuldencorehym,˛atistosayturnehis
hornesto˛eer˛wardvpwardandslitte˛eskynnof˛e
˛rote...(p.99)

Thepreciseterminologyclearlyservedapracticalpurposein
allowingconcisearticulationofthebehaviour,ageor
descriptionofananimal.BritishLibraryMSHarley2340
containsthefollowinglistofthehart'sactivitiesinthe
water:

ﬁehartetakys˛ewatyr-thanhesoyelys,&whanhego˛ewyth˛e
stremethanhefletys;whanhecummythvpa#enthanhebreky˛or
betys;whanhecummythouyrhecrossyth;whanheretornythto˛e
todyrsydeherecrossyth;whanhetakyth˛emaynelondehefleyth.
(f.50v)

Thesetermsallowthehuntertorelatesuccinctlythehart's
behaviourandtheyhaveaprecisedescriptivemeaning.Toa
lesserextentthetermsfortheexcrementsofdifferentanimals,
orthecoloursofanimals,orthenamesgiventothemat
differentages,haveanexactandusefulmeaning.Yetatthe
sametimeexclusivityisbuiltintothelanguageofthehunt.
WhentheDukeofYorkliststerms,hestressesthattheyareto
beusedwhenhunterstalktogether:

andifhehappe˛athebeamongegoodhunters˛atspekynof
huntyng,heshuldspekein˛ismaner,firstifmenaskehymof
pasturis,hemayanswereasofhertisandforalleo˛erdeere,
swetepasturis,andofallebitengbeestisasofwildeboores,
woluesando˛erbytengbeestishemayanswere,˛eifede...p.78

ItisnotablethatMalorytellsusthatTristramwasthefather
ofvenerynotbecauseheinventedthepractices,butbecausehe
introducedtheterminologyofthechase:

hebegan...allthetearmyswehaveyetofhawkyngeandhuntynge.
Andthereforethebookeof[venery,ofhawkyngeandhuntyngeis
calledthebookeof]sirTrystrams.

...alljantyllmen...oughtofryghttohonouresirTrystramsfor
thegoodlytearmysthatjantylmenhaveanduseandshalldounto
theDayofDome,thattherebyinamanerallmenofworshypmay
disceverajantylmanfromeayomanandayomanfromea
vylayne.ê03,12Ä

Itisthislastpoint-theneedto'disceverajantylmanfromea
yomanandayomanfromeavylayne'-whichisservedbythemore
N012:000803370003
ÄÑTheWorksofSirThomasMaloryÄ,editedbyEugeneVinaver,2nd
edition,3vols(Oxford,1967),I,p.375,lines18-29.

E
Äpedanticspeciallanguageofthehunt.Noextrainformationabou
theanimalisconveyedbysaying'fede'or'pasturis'butthe
wordstellthelistenerthatthespeakerisagentleman.TheDuke
ofYorkfurtherstressesthatahuntershouldsaya'great'hart,
nota'big'hartora'large'hart,andliststheacceptable
colourwords:

Andifheha˛sayanhertwi˛eyn˛erisiiimanersofhewisof
hen,˛atoonisclepydbroun,˛ato˛erjelow,and˛eiiidune,
andsohemayclepehemashim˛inke˛˛at˛eiberenherhues.
p.78

Paradoxically,thisinsistenceontherighttermsmayreducethe
degreeofprecisionpossible.Usually,wemaythinkthecategory
brownincludesshadesoftawnyanddun.Butinthemedieval
hunter'svocabularytheobjectÑhartÄdemandsoneoftheadjectives
ÑbrownÄ,ÑdunÄ,ÑyellowÄ,soahartwhichcouldbestbedescribedas
'tawny'mustbecalledeither'brown'or'yellow'asthehunter
thinksappropriate.Further,inthedescriptivephrase'abrown
hart',themeaningof'brown'dependsonthelistener'sknowledge;
'brown'heredoesnotincludedun(asitmayseemtodotothe
uninitiated)butitmayincludetawny.Thedistinction
ÑbrownÄ/ÑtawnyÄisnon-utilitarianandisadifferencecreatedto
giveaspecialstatustothehunterwhoknowsit.Languagethen
becomesnotaninstrumentofcommunicationbutofexclusion,
actingasacodeandabarrier.Thosewhofeelnowadaysthey
shouldsayÑpuddingÄinsteadofÑsweetÄ,ÑsetteeÄinsteadofÑsofaÄ,
manifestasimilarawarenessthattheiruseoflanguagemay
betrayalowsocialclassorignoranceofacceptedform.Inthe
medievalhunt,theinitiatedareunitedbytheirspecialuseof
language,theuninitiatedexcludedbyit.Asweshallseelater
inaliterarycontext,huntingistaughtandlearntasasystem
ofpreciselanguage.Wordsoperateasasemi-magicalkeyto
knowledge;toknowthewordistoapprehendthemeaningand
natureoftheobjectoractivityitdenotes.


ÅVenery,chaseandverminÄ

Besidesknowledgeoftherightlanguage,ahunter'snobilityis
manifestedinthetypesofanimalshehunts.Anoblehuntsman
onlyhunts'beastsofvenery'.Theprincipaldivisionofanimals
isintobeastsofvenery,chaseandvermin,althoughthe
classificationisnotconsistentindifferenttexts.Itislaid
outinsomeverseswhichprecedethelatermanuscriptcopyofthe
ÑArtofVeneryÄ.Thesecategorisethehare,hart,wolfandboaras
venery,thebuck,doe,fox,martenandroedeeraschase,and
groupthebadger,wildcatandottertogetheras'neythervenery
nechace'.ê03,13ÄThevariationsinclassificationdonotgenerally
N013:001003890003
ÄTheseversesareprintedbyBaillie-Grohman,ÑTheMasterof
GameÄ,pp.??

E
Äaddtothislistbutconsistprimarilyofomissionsfromit.The
ÑTretyseoffHuntyngÄomitsthewolffromthebeastsofvenery
(lines171-2)andgivesnoanswertothequestion'Howmony
wythinchase?'.Twiti'streatiserecognisesonlytwocategories,
buttheÑMasterofGameÄgivestheadditionalclassoffolly-
immatureandfemaledeer:'Andalshallebejugedfolyofrede
deerbine˛hertandoffalowedeerbyneuthe˛ebuk'(p.111).

Itisnotatallclearwhatcriteriawereoriginallyusedforthe
primaryclassificationoftheanimalsasvenery,chaseorvermin.
TheonlycontemporaryaccountisinÑLeArtdevenerieÄ,and
indicatesthatthedistinctionwasdependentupontheanimal
beingtrackedwithalimer,sayingthatthehare,hart,wolfand
boarandtrackedwiththelimerandthebuck,doe,fox,vixenand
'allothervermin'aremovedfromtheirlairswithbrachets
(lines15-21).Butthedistinctionbetweenanimalstrackedwith
alimerandthosemovedwithbrachetsisnotmaintained
elsewhere.Apartfromtheselinesthereisnoevidencetosuggest
thatbeastsofveneryotherthanthehartandboarwereharboured
withthelimer;inlateryearsthehartwasnotinvariably
harboured,astheÑTretyseoffHuntyngÄdemonstrates.

In1596JohnManwoodpublishedacomprehensive(thoughnot
particularlyreliable)accountofforestlawentitledÑLawesof
theForestÄ.Inthis,hedistinguishesbetweenbeastsofvenery
andchaseaccordingtotheirpreferredhabitat,sayingthat
beastsofvenery('beastsoftheForest')remaininthewoods
duringdaylight,whilethebeastsofchasepassthedaysinthe
fields.ê21,14ÄHowever,Manwood'sdistinctioncannotaccountfor
theseparatecategorisationofdifferentspeciesofdeer,andit
mustbeconcludedthatthecriteriaforclassificationwere
N014:000704180021
ÄJohnManwood,ÑATreatiseoftheLawesoftheForestÄ,(London,
1615),facsimile,TheEnglishExperienceno.814(Amsterdam,
1976),chapter4,iv,f.41r-v:

ThebeastsoftheForestdoemaketheirabode,alltheday
time,inthegreatcouertsandsecretplacesinthewoods:And
inthenightseason,theydoerepaireintothelawnes,
medowes,pastures,andpleasantfeedings,fortheirfoodand
reliefe.AndtherforetheyarecalledSyluesters,thatisto
say,beastsofthewood....AndsothebeastsoftheForestare
onelythose,thatdoekeepethecouerts,whicharecalled
beastsofvenerie.AndthebeastsofChase,theydoemake
theirabode,allthedaietime,inthefields,andvponthe
hils,orhighmountaines...and,inthenightseason...theydoe
repairevntothecornefieldsandvalliesbelow,wherethe
lawnes,meadowes,andpleasantfeedingsarefortheirfoodand
reliefe,andthereforetheyarecalledCampestres,thatisto
say,beastsofthefield....thosewildbeasts,thatdoehaunt
thefieldsandthehills...arethebestsofChase.


E
Äalreadyforgotten.

Itisnotpossibletodeterminefromtheexistingevidencethe
criteriaaccordingtowhichtheanimalswereclassified,butthey
werenotanyobviousdifferencesbetweentheanimals.Thebeasts
ofvenerydidnothaveequivalenteconomicvalue,theyarenot
alledible,theroedeerwasconsideredasgoodachaseasthe
harebutisnotincluded,theyhavevariousdietsandthereare
nobiologicalsimilaritiesbetweenthem.Thereisanimplication
intheÑTretyseoffHuntyngÄthatthetypeoffatmayhave
influencedcategorisation;theharebecomesvenerywhenitbears
'argent'andthebuck'isnoweneson,&bereztalowe'(152),
whiletheboaratthefifthyearhas'faucewax'.Thereisno
similaritybetweenthefatofthesebeastsrecognisedtodaywhich
couldaccountfortheirbeinggroupedtogether.Finally,the
suggestionthattheclassificationwasbasedonalegal
distinction,reflectingthedifferentapplicationofforestlaw
tothedifferentanimals,mustalsoberejectedasitimposesa
regrouping(withthehart,roedeerandbuckclassedtogether)
whichisnotfoundinthehuntingmanuals.ê03,15Ä

Thetendencytocategorisedoesnotendwiththeprimary
classificationofbeastsasvenery,chaseandvermin.InTwiti's
text,theanimalsarefurtherdividedaccordingtosuch
characteristicsasthetypeoftheirfat,whethertheyare
trackedbyalimerbeforethehunt,andhowtheirskinis
removed.Sometimesthereisacombination(orconfusion)ofthe
urgetocategoriseandthedevelopmentofspecialistterminology;
thussomebeastsareclassifiedaccordingtotermsappliedto
them,butthesetermsthemselvesaretheresultofextreme
refinementsinthewaytheanimalisperceivedortreated.For
example,theclassificationofanimalsaccordingtowhetherthey
bearleatherorskindoesnotreflectanyqualitativebiological
characteristicofthepelt.Thedistinctionbetweenleatherand
skinisemployedtorationalisethedifferencebetweentheways
inwhichtheanimalsareskinned.Clearlytherehasbeena
reversalofthecauseandeffect;themethodofremovalhascome
todefinethedifferencebetweenleatherandskinbutisitself,
presumably,basedonanatomicalconstraints,orperhapsonthe
valueofthepelt.Itisreallytheselattercriteriawhich
distinguishskinfromleather,althoughthehuntingmanualsdo
notacknowledgethis.

IntheÑTretyseÄ,arushofquestionsaboutterminologyrevealsthe
samedesiretocategorise,thoughnotallthequestionsare
answered:

Howmanyvenesonezbene˛er?Ianswer,˛ehert,˛eboor,˛ehar.
Howmanywythinchase?Howmanyinquyrry?ﬁehert.Howmonyin
N015:004204400003
ÄG.J.Turner,ÑSelectPleasoftheForestÄ,SeldenSociety13
(London,1901),x-xiii.

E
Ärewarde?ﬁehare.Howmanyintrotandpare?Thebore....How
monybestezberethos&howmanyorgoos,andhowmanyberez
argent?(lines171-87)

Intheselines,manycategoriesareconstructedwhichfitonlya
singleanimal.Theauthorhasextendedthedivisionofthe
animalsbyallocatingspecialtermstoeachintoameansof
categorisation.Thisisincompletelyachieved,however:his
question'Howmany...?'demandsafigureforananswer,not
enumerationofthequalifyingbeasts.Theanswerinmostcases
mustbe'One',butthiswouldsurelyrevealtheinadequacyofhis
schemeofcategorisation.

Thatneithertheprincipaldivisionofanimalsintothe
categoriesofvenery,chaseandverminnorthesupplementary
divisionsaresusceptibletorationalexplanationservesfurther
tomarkthehuntasanareaofspecialknowledge.Theordinary
personcannotseeanylinkbetweenthehart,hare,boarandwolf,
oranyspecialdifferencebetweentheseanimalsandthefoxor
badger.Thecategorisationservesnopracticalpurpose,itdoes
notreflectsimilarhuntingtechniques,andservesonlytodivide
theelitewhoknowitfromthosewhodonot.'Noble'huntingis
restrictedtocorrectpursuitofthenoblebeasts:this
universally-acknowledgeddistinctionpermeatesliterarytextsin
whichaheromaybeimmediatelymarkedasnobleifheengagesin
ahartorboarhunt.Conversely,the'ignoble'beastswerenot
worthyofliteraryattention;withtheexceptionofdeer-drives,
therearehardlyanyhuntsotherthanforbeastsofveneryin
MiddleEnglishliterature,andnoexamplesofhuntsforvermin.


ÅConclusionÄ

Aswehaveseen,thehuntingmanualsarefarfromofferinglucid
instructionsinthepracticalaspectsofhunting.Instead,they
concentrateonthenon-utilitarian,courtlyaspectswhichweare
likelytoconsiderperipheraltotheactivity.

Asaworkingmanual,theÑTretyseÄagaindiffersfromtheother
huntingmanuals,whichmakeconspicuousdisplayoftheirnon-
utilitarianaspects.ThelargerpartoftheMasterofGameis
concernedwithbackgroundinformationwhich,thoughpractical,
wouldhardlyhavebeenconsultedinthefield,butratherreadat
leisure.TheÑBokeofHuntyngÄandtheÑArtofVeneryÄbothadoptthe
literarydevicesofdialogueormonologue,renderingthetexts
self-consciouslystylisedinawaywhichtheÑTretyseÄnever
attempts.NoteventheÑTretyseÄisutilitarianinthesenseof
providingdetailswhichmightcontributetothespeedycompletion
ofahuntforfood;itspreoccupation,likethatoftheother
manuals,iswiththeaspectsofthenoblehuntwhichmarkeditas
sportratherthananinnatelyusefulactivity.Butherethehorn
signalsandhuntingcries-andevensomeoftheterminology-
aregiveninthecontextofanaccountofthehunt'sprogress,
andthisformismaintainedconsistently.Itispossibleto
ÄimaginethehunterconsultingtheÑTretyseÄinthefieldfor
instructionsifhehadforgottenthehornsignalappropriateto
somecircumstance,whereasthiscouldhardlybethecasewithany
oftheothermanualswhich,cumbersomeorjumbled,arebest
accommodatedinthelibraryandreadindoors.

WemayconcludethatthemajorpreoccupationsoftheMiddle
Englishhuntingmanualsarenotwiththepracticalproceduresof
thehunt,butwiththedetailsofterminologycorrecthunting
calls,andcategorisationofanimalswhichareoflittle
practicaluse.Thesepreoccupationsrevealtheattitudeofthe
authorstowardsthehunt-thatitwasessentiallyanoble,non-
utilitarianactivityinwhichknowledgeofformanddemonstration
ofthatknowledgewereofparamountimportance,ofmore
importancethantheostensibleaimofkillinganimals.

Thestyleandstructureofthehuntingmanualsreinforcethe
impressiongivenbytheircontents.Insteadofpresentingthe
materialaslucidlyandplainlyaspossible,theyemploy
artificialstructuresofdramaticinterchangeornarrative
sequence,andspurious'literariness'whichsometimesornament-
butsometimesobscure-thefactswhichitistheirfunctionto
communicate.

However,itwouldnotbefairtosuggestthatthehuntingmanuals
neglectcompletelythepracticaldetailsofthehunt.The
refinementswhichformthebasisoftheconcernwithterminology,
classification,huntingcallsandhornsignalsarenotpurely
cosmetic.Theyserveapracticalpurposeoftheirowninordering
theprocessofthehunt,infacilitatingcommunicationbetween
hunters,andincrystallisingthestructureofanactivitywhich
couldotherwisebechaotic.However,thesedetailshavebecomeso
refinedastoappearunrelatedtotherealbusinessofhunting,
andthemanualsdonothingtore-establishoraffirmthelink
withpracticalutility.Thereisthen,atensionbetweentheneed
tocommunicateinformationwhichispracticallyusefulandthe
desiretosubsumetheignobleutilitarianaspectsofinstruction
intheartofhunting.Thetextsaswehavethemaretheresult
ofthattension-'manuals'whichareapparentlyworksof
instruction,butwhichrarelyadequatelyteachthebasicsofthe
skillwithwhichtheyareconcerned.

Itwillemergeinthefollowingchaptersthatthistension
betweentheusefulandtheornate,nobleaspectsofthehunt
underliesandinformstheappearanceofthehuntinmanytypesof
literature.Acertainambiguitysurroundsthecourtlyhuntinits
manymanifestationsinliterarytexts,andattitudestowardsthe
huntareoftenambivalent.Thusaconcernwithhuntingis
consideredsinfulinsomecontexts,virtuousinothers.Thehunt
isassociatedwithjoyfulvitalityand,inthesameform,with
death.Ahuntermaybealoveroroneoflove'sdetractors.The
restofthisbookexaminesthevarioususestowhichhunting
imagesandepisodeswereputbymedievalEnglishwriters,
illustratingthewide-rangingeffectsoftheambivalenceinherent
ÄinEnglishattitudestowardsthehunt.

5800words,26-12-89

