06601030305800
1
2#
F0110030
R   [................................................]001
9[...................................................]001
ÅCHAPTER3

THESECULARTRADITION:NARRATIVEANDDEFINITIVEMOTIFS
Ä
Wearenowreadytoexplorethemotifswhichgrewupand
flourishedinEnglandduringtheMiddleAges.Somelinkswith
previoustraditionareoftenevident,butthemotifsare
essentiallynew:theirformisradicallyalteredandtheir
purposetransformedtosuittheinterestsandrequirementsof
Englishauthorsandtheiraudiences.

Itisdifficulttofindacohesivestructurewhichcan
accommodateacomprehensivestudyofthewidelydisseminated
huntingmotifs.Theirappearanceinalargenumberoftextsof
differenttypesprecludesasystematicconsiderationbygenre.
Butastudyofthemotifsrevealsaregularpatternofusewhich
dividesthemapproximatelyintosecularandreligious.Thoughthe
distinctionisnottotallyrigid,itishelpfulasastarting
point,soweshalllookattheseculartraditioninthischapter
andthereligiousmotifsinChapter4.

Therearetwodistincttypesofsecularmotifs:huntingepisodes
andimagesmayserveanarrativefunction,furtheringthe
developmentoftheplot,ormayhelptodefineacharacter's
personalityandrole.Thereligiousmotifsdevelopasingle
idea:thehuntbringstothetextaseriesofassociationsand
connotationsrevolvingaroundthehuntasrepresentativeof
worldlypreoccupation.However,theusestowhichwritersputthe
motifscannotalwaysbecategorisedassimplyasthis.Amore
talentedwritercouldcombineallthree-the'narrative',
'definitive'and'associative'functions-inasingleepisode,
andthebestwriterstaketheirexplorationofamotiffarbeyond
itsusuallimits.Thedistinctionbetweensecularandreligious
motifsimposesananachronisticpolarityonthetexts.Much
medievalliteraturedoesnotfallsimplyintoonecategoryorthe
other,andnosuchcleardivisioncouldhavebeenpossibleor
necessaryintheMiddleAges-themedievalreadercouldhappily
accommodatethereligiousandprofanesidebysidewithoutany
qualms.Consequently,wewillsometimesfindthatworkswhich
wouldnormallybeconsideredsecular,usehuntingmotifswhich
arefoundpredominantlyinareligiouscontext.Suchexamplesare
consideredinthenextchapteralongsidethereligiousworks
whichuseanalogousmotifs.Thereisfurtherblurringofthe
categoriesasdifferentwritersviewtheconnotationsof
courtlinessdifferently.Whatonepoetseesaslaudablecivility
anotherseesassinfulostentation,yetbothholdupastheir
examplethesamefigure:thecourtlyhunterinhisfinery.


ÅNarrativeanddescriptionÄ

Thenarrativeusesofthehunthavenotbeennotedbefore,
despitetheirfrequency,probablybecausetheyaregivenonly
rudimentarydevelopmentasincidentsintheirownright.The
Äusualformisofoneortwolinesevokingthehunt,followedby
theintroductionofanadventure:

     ...'wharis˛eking?'
     ...'anhonting,
     Wi˛kingesfiftene'.ê04,1Ä

     WhyleTorrentanhuntyngwaseê03,2Ä

     TheKinghimrodanhuntingeê06,3Ä

     [BernardMassingerewas]
     Huntyngafturanhyndeê03,4Ä

     ﬁaidi#thimwi˛-outendueling,
     Fortowendeondere-hunting,
     &buskedhemfortoride.ê03,5Ä

Theconventionalformofthebriefreferencetothehunt
occasionallyspecifiesthepreyand/ormentionsthehunters'
preparations,butdoesnotexpanduponthehunt'sprogress.Where
thehuntepisodeisgivengreaternarrativedevelopmentinits
ownright,itgenerallyhasasecondaryfunctiondeveloping
character.

Whenhuntingmotifsareusedtodefinecharacter,theprogressof
thehuntbecomesimportant,asthehunter'spersonalityis
developedthroughhisconductinit.Thehuntmostoftenusedin
thiswayistheboar-hunt,sincethedangeroftheconfrontation
allowsthewritertodemonstrateboththemartialprowessand
courtlyskillofthehero.Theconsistentstructuralpatterning
ofthismotiffromoneromancetoanotherreinforcesits
amplificationoftheheroinlinewithconventionalchivalric
N001:002500590004
ÑTheRomanceofSirBeuesofHamtounÄ,editedbyE.Kolbing,EETS
ES46,48,65(London,1885-94;reptd.asonevolume,1973),
lines2053-5.

N002:003400610003
ÄÑTorrentofPortyngaleÄ,editedbyE.Adam,EETSES51(London,
1887),line772.

N003:003300630006
ÄÑKingHornÄ,inÑKingHorn,FlorisandBlauncheflur,The
AssumptionofourLadyÄ,editedbyGeorgeH.McKnight,EETS14
(London,1901)HarleyMS,lines684-5.(CambridgeMShasonly
"ﬁekynghimrodanhuntinge",684;Laudexpandsitslightly:
"˛ekyngrodonhuntingge/Towodeheganwende,/For
lacchen˛eheynde",684-6.)
N004:002700660003
ÑSirTriamourÄ,editedbyT.Wright,PercySociety16(London,
1846),line23.

N005:003000700003
ÄÑAmisandAmilounÄ,editedbyMacEdwardLeach,EETS203(London,
1937),lines496-8.

E
Ävaluesbyrecallingsimilarmotifsandtheirheroes.However,a
deer-huntmaybeemployedtoshowcowardiceorfollyinthe
character,ortodemonstrateonlycourtlyskillwithoutthe
warrior-likequalitiesoftheboar-hunter.

Theassociativeusesofthehuntdescribedinthenextchapter
againdonotgenerallydeveloptheepisodetoanygreatextent,
althoughagroupofdetailedtreatmentsinalliterativeverse
formanimportantexception.Often,theassociationsofthehunt
aretobededucedfromthebriefestmentionofthepastime.
Closelyalliedwiththisarebriefmentionsofthehunttoevoke
courtliness.Thesebecameformulaicandextremelyconcise,
comparablewiththeÑreverderieÄmotifinlyricpoetryasameans
ofcallingupanestablishedsetofassociations.

Inthischapterweshalllookatthreenarrativemotifs-a
meetingwhilehunting,theunfortunatehunt,andaseductionor
abductioninthehunter'sabsence-andfourdefinitivemotifs-
theepicboar-hunter,thecowardlyorfoolishhunter,the
proficienthunter,andthecourtlyhunter.Itisthelastof
thesethatsharessomeofthefeaturesoftheassociativemotifs
describedinthenextchapter.Itdrawsonpre-existing
associationsofcourtlyleisuretosuggestthenoblecharacterof
thehunter,evokingthesamequalitieswhicharecondemnedor
criticisedinareligiouscontext.


ÅThehuntandadventure:narrativehuntingmotifsÄ

Themostfrequentlyoccurringnarrativefunctionofthehuntin
secularliteratureisasthemeansofbeginninganadventure.The
huntiseitherinterruptedorleadsthehunterintoisolation,
andsomeadventurefollows.Thehuntisquicklyleftbehind,but
remainsavitalconstituentinthetextswhichusethemotif.

Afittingintroductiontothehuntasthenaturalpreludeto
adventureisfoundinanepisodeinMalory'sÑMorteDarthurÄ.
Earlyinthework,thehuntisusedtointroducenotonlya
singleadventurebuttheentireconceptofÑaventureÄ.Thetermsin
whichadventureisfirstdefinedinthisearlyepisodeareto
standfortheremainderofthework,augmentedbylaterevents,
butunalteredinessence.

TheadventureofthewhitehartinthetaleofTorreandPellinor
(BookIII,chapter1)beginswhenahuntforcesitsattention
uponthecourt.AsArthur'scourtpreparetoeatthefeast
celebratinghismarriagetoGuinevere,awhitehartentersthe
hallfollowedbyawhitebrachetandthirtycoupleofblack
hounds.Aknightcarriesoffthebrachet,aladycomesinand
complains,butisherselftakenawaybyanotherknight.Arthuris
gladofthis-'whanshewasgonethekyngewasgladde,forshe
madesuchanoyseê'Ä(I,p.103,lines11-12).Thisismorethana
jokeaboutArthur'sdislikeofcommotion,asemergesinMerlin's
wordsimmediatelyafterwards:
Ä
'Nay',seydeMerlion,'yemaynatlevehitso,thysadventure,so
lyghtly,forthesadventuresmustebebroughttoanende,other
ellishitwollbedisworshyptoyouandtoyourefeste.'(I,p.103,
lines13-16)

ThispassageistoresoundthroughouttheÑMorteDarthurÄ,asthe
ensuingeventsestablishthecourt'sdevotiontoadventure.In
otherhuntingmotifsinMalory'swork,themomentumofthehunt
remainsasignificantelement,anditsassociationwithadventure
isimportanteveninepisodeswheretheprimaryinterestisnot
narrative.

Theconductoftheknightsinthethreeadventureswhichfollow
thehuntinTorreandPelinorprefiguresthebestandworst
aspectsofArthurianchivalry,andtheepisodeshowsalready
presentintheRoundTablefellowshipthegermsofbothits
greatesttriumphsandthefatewhichwilleventuallyovertakeit.
ItisadismalandinauspiciousstarttotheRoundTable's
history,withGawainbeheadinganinnocentwomanandPellinor
allowinghisdaughtertodie.Blindobedienceandmercilesspride
predominate,butitisadefinitivechapteranditsforeboding
contentisofvitalsignificance.

Thisistheepitomeofthehunt'sliteraryroleasan
introductiontoadventure;theeruptionofthehuntintoArthur's
courtsignifiesthecourt'sobligationtodevoteitselfto
adventure-theycan'tescapethisadventure-thatisovertly
statedbyMerlin:'yemaynatlevehitso,thysadventure,so
lyghtly,forthesadventuresmustebebroughttoanende'.Soit
becomesthedestinyanddutyofeveryindividualandofthecourt
asawholeto'taketheadventure...thatGodwollordayne'.

Inthisepisode,Maloryinvertsaconventionalmotif,the
'meetingwhilehunting',toshowthehuntforcingitsattention
uponthecourtwhich,itseems,wouldhappilyavoidthehurly-
burlyanddisruptionofchivalricadventure,preferringthe
indulgenceofleisurelycourtlife.Inorderforthistypeof
inversiontobeeffective,Malorymusthavehadcomplete
confidenceinhisaudience'sfamiliaritywiththeassociationof
thehuntwithadventure.Howtheseassociationscametodevelop
duringthecenturyandahalfbeforehewrote,weshallnow
consider.

Ñ(1)MeetingswhileorafterhuntingÄ

Themostwidespreadnarrativehuntingmotifshowsahunter
meetinganothercharacterduringorafterahunt.Inpart,this
motifdrawsonreallife,foramedievalhuntermightwellmeet
someoneinthewoods.Whentransposedintoliterature,the
realisticstartingpointallowsanimaginativedesire(foran
affair,oranadventure)tobefulfilledcredibly.The
realisationofthedesirethroughthesubsequentnarrativeis
lentplausibilitybythefictionbeingrootedinthefamiliar
Äexperienceofthehunt.Thehuntisvitaltotheaudience's
acceptanceofthefiction,actingasasolidbasisforthe
adventure,andforgingalinkbetweenfantasyandreality.Yet
thehunthasgenerallybeenignoredandtakenforgrantedon
accountofthespeedwithwhichitisleftbehindasthe
adventuredevelops.

Themeetingwhilehuntingisusuallyaccidental,thoughinsome
instancesitiscontrived.Therearethreegeneralsub-categories
ofthemotif:thehuntermaymeetawomanwhobecomeshis
mistressorwife;orhemayhaveameetingwhichfurthershis
chivalriccareer,oftenbyleadingtohimhelpinganother
character;or,ifthehunterisaminorcharacterinthestory,
hemayfindawomanand/orchildwhomhethenadopts.Thewoman
isusuallythemotherofthehero,andthemotifisusedto
introducethechild(orhismother)toanewguardian.

Severalromancecharactersmeettheirfuturemistressorwife
afterahunt.Themoreinterestingexamplesarefoundin
ÑGenerydesÄ,theÑRomansofPartenayÄandÑPartonopeofBloisÄ.ê04,6Ä
AuferiousinÑGenerydesÄbecomeslostwhilehuntingandmeetsthe
faerySereynewhorevealsthetreacheryofhiswifeandsteward.
ShetellshimhemustsleepwithherandbegetGenerydeswhowill
workwonders.ê03,7ÄIntheÑRomansofPartenayÄ,RaymondandLord
Ameriebecomelostonahunt.LordAmerieiskilledbyaboar,
andRaymondthenmeetsMelusinewhosayshemustmarryher.ê03,8Ä
PartonopeofBloisbecomeslostonaboar-huntandthenwanders
aimlessly,travelsinashipandfinallyarrivesatanapparently
emptycastle.Heiswinedanddinedbyinvisibleattendantsand
ledtobedwherehefindshisfaerymistressMelior.ê03,9
Ä
Weshouldnotconfusethismeetingmotifwiththetraditionof
thelove-hunt.Innoinstanceisthehunteractivelyseekinga
sexualencounter,andinallcasesthewomanpresentsherselfto
himandtellshimwhathemustdo.Thereisnoattemptbythe
writersoftheromancestodrawaparallelbetweenthepursuitof
thehuntedbeastandofawoman.OnlyinÑPartonopeofBloisÄmight
wesuspectthatloveisaspredatoryasthecourtlyhunter.But
althoughMeliormayorchestratethehuntandPartonope'svoyage,
N006:005702140004
ÄInÑKingHenryÄ,thekingisvisitedinhishuntinglodgebya
hideoushagwhotestshisgenerosityandfinallyturnsintoa
beautifulwomanwhenhegrantsallherrequests.

N007:001302180003
ÄÑGenerydesÄ,editedbyW.A.Wright,EETS55&70(London,1878),
lines41ff.

N008:005902200003
ÄÑRomansofPartenay,orofLuisgnenÄ,editedbyW.W.Skeat,EETS
22(London,1866),lines134ff.

N009:005202240003
ÄÑPartonopeofBloisÄ,editedbyA.T.Bodtker,EETSES109
(London,1912),lines648ff.

E
Äsheisnothuntinghim.Thereisnoeagerpursuitoneitherpart
tosuggestahuntmetaphor-andatmostwemaysupposethat
Partonopeisthevictim,beingluredintoatrap.Whenhe
eventuallyfindshimselfinbedwithMelior,shesayshemustnot
touchher.Hisconsequentrapeofherconfusesstillfurtherany
allusiontothelove-huntmetaphor,sincetherolesofhunterand
quarrymustshiftconstantlyinthesequencefromPartonope's
hunttotheeventualactofrape.Instead,theemphasisin
ÑPartonopeÄ,asintheotherexamples,isonestablishingthe
hero'ssolitudeandpsychologicalreadinessforasexual
relationship.Thehuntputshiminthewayoffortune-whilethe
hunterisintheforestheisinlimbo,vulnerableandready-
andfortunefrequentlyseizestheopportunity.

Whenopportunitydoesnotleadtolove,itoftenleadstoa
developmentinthehero'schivalriccareer.Inmanyromances,a
newadventureorcampaignensuesfromameetingduringahunt.
ThusGuyofWarwickishuntingwhenhemeetsmerchantswhotell
himofthesiegeofConstantinople,afterwhichhegoestothe
aidoftheemperor.ê05,10ÄSirTriamourandSirEglamourboth
undertakesinglecombatsforfigurestheymeetafterhunts.ê05,11Ä
Malory'sSirTristramagreestodobattlewithPalomedesafter
meetinghimwhilehunting(II,59,23).TheSowdonofBabylonis
huntingonthesea-shorewhenheencountersamerchantship;this
meetingprecipitatesthewarwithRomeinwhichheeventually
dies.ê04,12ÄLybeausDesconusencountersaslainknightwhileout
huntingandthisinspireshimtoembarkonachivalric
career.ê04,13ÄAlltheseexamples,likethemeetingswithawifeor
mistress,showthehuntprecedingamajorchangeinthehunter's
life.

Aspecialtypeofmeetinghasthehunterdiscoverafoundling.In
ÑSirEglamourofArtoisÄandÑWilliamofPalerneÄ,aninfantisfound
N010:001902530005
ÄÑGuyofWarwickÄ,editedbyJ.Zupitza,EETSES25,26(London,
1875-6),lines2714ff.



N011:005902540005
ÄÑSirTriamourÄ,lines1053-6,1081-9,andÑSirEglamourof
ArtoisÄ,editedbyF.E.Richardson,EETS256(London,1965),
lines436ff.


N012:000502590004
ÄÑTheRomaunceoftheSowdoneofBabyloneÄ,editedbyEmil
Hausknecht,EETSES38(London,1881;reptd1969),lines50ff.


N013:000702610004
ÄÑLybeausDesconusÄ,editedbyM.Mills,EETS261(London,1969),
lines31ff.


E
ˇÄbyahuntingking.ê04,14ÄInÑSirTriamourÄboththeheroandhis
motherarefoundandadoptedbyahunter,andinÑTorrentof
PortyngaleÄonlyTorrent'smother,Desonell,isfoundbyahunting
kingwhothentakescareofher.ê15,15ÄHerethemotifispartof
thehunter'snarrative,notthefoundling's(orhero's)narrative
whichis,literally,adifferentstory.Theverseromancesare
usuallyquiteovertlyconcernedwiththestoryofonecentral
character,orsometimesofacouple,andweareonlyrarely
invitedtospeculateonthepossibilityofanothercharacter's
story,butthefoundlingmotifgivessuchanopportunity.The
familiarityofthefigureofahunterridingouttoasurprise
meetingissufficienttoarouseinterestinhisstoryevenwhen
thehunterisnottheprincipalcharacter.Oneeffectofthese
glimpsesofalternativeorperipheralnarrativesistoknitthe
centralstoryintoawholemythicbackground.Weseenotan
isolatedseriesofevents,butasequenceselectedfromawhole
worldofstorylargeenoughandcomplexenoughtoappearasa
paralleltotherealworld;itisimpossibletopulloutasingle
threadofnarrativewithoutfibresofthebackgroundfabric
clingingtoit.SoportionsofthestoriesofthekingofIsrael,
thekingofJerusalemorofSirBernardMassengere,whowas
'Huntyngafturanhynde'ê02,16ÄwhenhefoundMargaretandTriamour,
appearinthenarrativeswhichproperlybelongtothefoundlings.
Wherethenewcharacterhasasubstantialparttoplayinthe
subsequentunfoldingofthestory,thefragmentofbackground
providedbythehuntofferssuperficialsatisfactionforour
curiosity.Itprovideshimwithbothacourtlycontextandan
immediatepastthatisbriefenoughtomaintainthemomentumof
thesinglenarrative;anyadditionstothenarrativearenot
allowedtobringalonglooseend.

N014:001802670004
ÄÑEglamourÄ,lines850-70;ÑTheRomanceofWilliamofPalerneÄ,
editedbyW.W.Skeat,EETSES1(London,1867),lines198ff.


N015:003202700015
ÑTriamourÄ,linesc420;ÑTorrentÄ,lines2032ff.Desonellflees
fromanotherhunt,lines2020-8:

  Asshewalkidthana-lone,
 Shesyelordisonhuntynggone,
 Nerehemsheyedefullsone.

 Thiscarfullladycriedfaste,
  Thansheherdthishornesblaste
 Bytheyatisgone,
  Butranintoawildernes,
 Amongistbeeststhatwyldwes,
 Fordred,shesholdbeslone.


N016:002402880002
ÄÑTriamourÄ,line423.

E
ÄThehunterwhodiscoversafoundlingistheactivepartyatthe
encounter.However,intheScottishromanceÑSirTristremÄwefind
anexampleinwhichtheactionislessone-sided.SirTristrem
arrivesinCornwalltofindMark'shuntsmenabouttocutupa
deerincorrectly;heshowsthemhowtodoitcorrectly,andis
takenintoMark'scourt.Tristremplaysamoreactivepartthan
thefoundlingsintheotherexamples.Intheotherromances,the
womanorchildtakesovertheroleofquarry-sheorheisfound
andtakenhome,theanimalbeingabandonedatthemomentofthe
foundling'sdiscovery.However,Tristremtakesovertheroleof
hunterandaltersthepracticeofthehuntersirrevocably.This
isagreaterimmediateeffectthananyofthefoundlingshave,
whoareinsteadadoptedandimbuedwiththeirfinder'sculture.
Tristremchangeskillingthedeerintohunting,hedefinesand
createsthehuntforMark'scourtandsoredefinesthesituation
inwhichhemetthehunters.Ofcourse,thisepisodeisfoundin
otherversionsoftheTristanlegend,andweshallreturntothis
specialrolelater.

Thecentralfeaturesofthemeetingmotifaretheprotagonist's
solitudeandtheconsequentchangeofdirectioninthenarrative.
Beforeameeting,theheroisalone,eitherbecausehehunts
aloneorbecausehehasbecomeseparatedfromhisfellows.Heis
effectivelyidle,havingnoinvolvementinanarrativesequence.
Thehuntingcharacterscanbedescribedintermsoftheirstatus
only-theEarlofToulouseê07,17Äisamiserablelover,Auferiousa
deceivedking,Lybeausanignorantboy.Theyhavethepotential
toholdourinterest,butneedintroducingintoanarrativein
ordertodoso;thehuntperformsthisfunction.Itisnotthen
surprisingthatmanymeetingscomenearthebeginningofthe
romances,astheydoinÑGenerydesÄ,ÑLybeausDesconusÄ,theÑRomans
ofPartenayÄ,ÑPartonopeofBloisÄ,theÑSowdonofBabylonÄandthe
ÑWeddyngeofSirGawenandDameRagnellê12,18Ä.Usuallythehunterisat
N017:002703230007
ÄTheEarlofToulouseishuntingwhenhemeetsamessengerwho
tellshimofhisbeloved'sneedforachampion.Heeventually
winsherasaconsequence.ÑTheEarlofToulouseÄinÑMiddle
EnglishMetricalRomancesÄ,editedbyW.H.French&C.B.Hale
(NewYork,1930),pp.383-419:lines...


N018:003803300012
ÄInÑTheWeddyngeofSirGawenandDameRagnellÄ,Arthuris
huntingwhenhemeetsGromerSomerJourewhothreatenstokill
himunlesshecandiscovertheanswertothequestion'whatdo
womenmostdesire'inayear.Thisromancegivesconsiderable
developmenttotheinitialhunt,andArthurpointsoutthathe
isonlyinhishuntinggearanditwouldbedishonourableif
GromerSomerJourekilledhimunarmed.Thepoemismildly
alliterative,anditsextensivetreatmentofthehuntmaybe
linkedtoalliterativeroots.Weshallseeinthenextchapter
thatalliterativepoetryisdistinguishedbygivingfulland
detaileddescriptionsofthehuntscenesitemploys.

E
Äleisure,occasionallyhemaybedistraught,butinanycaseheis
ready,physicallyandpsychologicallyforanewcourseofaction.
Thisreadinessforameeting,thedesireforadventure,is
expressedandfulfilledwithinanaturalisticsettingasthe
huntingexpeditionprovidesthenecessaryopportunity.

Inmedievalliterature,andintheromancesinparticular,the
huntcanleadtothemarginsofexperience,toadventureand
sometimesdeath.Itservesasatransitionalactivitywhich
allowstheherotopassfromtheordinarytothefantastic,to
leavehisfamiliarworldandenterintoanewone.Therearemany
formsthetransitionmaytake;itmayinvolveactualsocial
change(marriage,forinstance),orarevelationwhich
irrevocablyaltersthehero'sperceptionofhislife.In
ÑGenerydesÄ,Auferiousreturnstocourtafterhismeetingwith
Sereyne,buthehasreplacedhiscontentment,complacencyand
ignorancewithsorrowandwisdom.Bycontrast,thehuntin
ÑPartonopeÄseverstheherofromhisoriginalworldmoreliterally:
returningtothecourtisimpossiblebecauseheiscompletely
lost,andeventsarebeyondhiscontrol.Thesameistrueof
RaymondintheÑRomansofPartenayÄ;heislost,andfeels
responsibleforAmerie'sdeath.Hecannotgobacktohisformer
stateandisonlyabletoreturntocourtwhenMelusinegiveshim
instructions.

Morefrequently,theprotagonist'soriginalworldisnotforcibly
removed;itmaybealtered,orhemaychoosetoleaveit.Thus
LybeausDesconus,discoveringaslainknightwhenhunting,is
introducedtochivalryandleaveshislifeintheforest.His
discoverymakeshispreviouslycontentrurallifeseem
inadequate.Othersbeginanimportantadventurewhichdrastically
changestheirlives,asdotheEarlofToulouseandtheSowdonof
Babylon,whobeginadventureswhichleadrespectivelytomarriage
anddeath.ê02,19Ä

Meetingswhilehuntingdonotalwayscomeatthebeginningofa
romance,however.Ameetingsometimesintroducesanewadventure
inaseries,exploitingthehero'sleisuretobringhimintothe
nextstageofhisnarrative.ThusGuyofWarwickbecomesinvolved
inthesiegeofConstantinople,andTriamourbecomeshisfather's
champion.ÑGuyofWarwickÄusesthehuntrepeatedlytointroducea
newdeparture,settingupapatternofchivalricassociations
withinthetextwhichthepoetuseswhenGuy'schivalryis
finallyquestioned(seebelow,page00).Whenthehuntoccursin
themiddleofastory,thechangeinthehunter'slifeisnotas
drastic,butthehuntmarksahiatusintheaction.Whenonetask
isaccomplished,andanotherhasnotyetpresenteditself,a
characterhunts,makinghimselfavailableforachancemeetingin
theforestwhichmayprecipitatethenextepisodeinhisstory.
ThehuntiscomparablewithMalory'sdeviceofthequesting
N019:001003640002
ÑEarlofToulouseÄ,lines...;ÑSowdoneofBabyloneÄ,lines49ff.

E
Äknight,butinsteadofactivelyseekingadventure,thehunter
waitsforittocometohim-itusuallydoes,andhemustthen
maketherightchoiceandtakeupthechallenge.

Whenahunterencountersacharacterorevent,hishuntis
interruptedandhefollowshisnewadventure.Thisisasit
shouldbe,forthedemandsofloveormilitaryserviceare
superiortothoseofhuntingandalaudablecharacterrenounces
thechaseformoreimportantconsiderations.Huntingenhancesa
characteratleisure,bringingassociationsofnobilityand
courtliness,butthehunter'scharacterisfurtherenhancedwhen
heleavesthehunttotakeuphisnewcourseofaction,showing
thathehashisprioritiesright.Asweshallseelater,this
interestinprioritiesdevelopedindependentlyintoamotif
denouncingorridiculingcharacterswhodonotrecognisethatthe
huntshouldoccupyalowerplaceintheirschemeofvaluesthan
loveorwar.Asimilarinterestinthecorrectplaceofhunting
inacharacter'sschemeofvaluesisdemonstratedinthe
religioustreatmentsweshalllookatinthenextchapter.

Becausethehuntsarealwaysabandonedafterameeting,theymay
seemtobeunimportant.Indeed,fortheheroofchivalric
romance,huntingisunimportantwhenthedemandsofloveor
militaryservicetakeprecedence.Butinthestructureofthe
episodes,huntinghasasignificantparttoplay.Onthemost
elementarylevel,itprovidesthenarrativeframeworkwhich
allowsameetingtotakeplace.Thehuntgivesthestory
coherenceandplausibility,providingareasonforthehunterto
beintheforest.Butbyrepeateduseofthemotif,thehunt
becametheacceptedsettingforcoincidences,andsoaftera
whilethosecoincidenceswhichoccurredonahuntwererendered
immediatelycrediblebytheweightofconvention.Theadvantage
ofthehuntderivesfromitsubiquityandordinariness(yet
inherentinterest).Thehuntingcharacterandhisadventure
requirenofurtherjustificatorycausationorspecial
explanation.


(2):Theunfortunatehunt

Almostascommonasthemeetingmotifisthemotifofthe
unfortunatehunt.Again,thehunter'sisolationandtemporary
exclusionfromnormalsocietyofferastartingpoint,butnowhis
readinessforanewdepartureisdevelopedasvulnerability.This
vulnerabilitymayleadtohisdownfallintheforest,ortosome
catastropheathomeinhisabsence.Themotifisfrequently
associatedwithtreachery,withanenemyexploitingeitherhis
isolationorhisabsencefromcourt.

Theunfortunatehunthasseveralfunctionsinromance.Inits
simplestform,itallowstheplottomovetothenextstage,but
oftenitalsoennoblesthehero,orprovidesmotivationforlater
actions.InÑBevesofHamtounÄ,theÑRomansofPartenayÄandÑGuyof
WarwickÄthemotifperformsallthesefunctionsatonce.Atthe
ÄstartofBevesofHamtoun,thehero'sfatherissentonaboar-
huntbecausehissickwifeneedsamedicinemadefromaboar.But
thehuntispartofhertreacherousplot,andheismurderedby
herlover.Thisincidentpavesthewayforthebanishmentof
Beves,whoisresentfulofhisnewstepfather,andprovideshis
latermotivationforkillinghim.ItalsoenhancesBeves'sown
characterwhenhesurpasseshisfather'saction,latersucceeding
inkillingadangerousboarandthefosterswhothenattack
him.ê04,20ÄIntheÑRomansofPartenayÄ,Raymondandhislord,Amerie,
becomelostonahunt.Amerieiskilledbytheboartheyare
pursuing,butRaymondeventuallykillstheanimal.Althoughthis
huntisparticularlyunfortunateforAmerie,itisalso
unfortunateforRaymond,whoisdistraughtatthelossofhis
lord,afraidofbeingaccusedofmurderinghim,andislostand
benightedintheforest.ê03,21ÄThepredominantfunctionofAmerie's
deathistoisolateRaymondreadyforhisownadventurebut,in
addition,hisdeathdemonstratestheboar'sferocityandsoalso
magnifiesRaymond'sheroismwhenhefinallydefeatsit.WhenGuy
ofWarwickhuntsagiganticboarintoaprivateforestand
killstheowner'ssoninaquarrel,hehastotakeonvarious
furtherfightsasaresult.ê02,22ÄThisisamajorturningpointin
theromance,andthemisfortunenotonlyintroducessubsequent
eventsbutmarksthepointatwhichallthevirtuesassociated
withthenoblehunterarebroughtintoquestion.Thisepisodeis
discussedatlengthbelowwithotherexamplesofthe'epic'boar-
huntmotif.

Usually,misfortuneduringahuntennoblesthehunterinsomeway,
thoughthisisnotalwaysthecase.Themisfortunecantakemany
forms.ForOtesdeLile,itisdefeatatthehandsofLybaeus
Desconus,whotakesoneofhishuntinghoundsandthensubdues
Otesinaduel.ê04,23ÄAswiththefoundlingepisodes,thehuntgives
OtesdeLileaswiftandnaturalintroductionintothepoemwith
ascrapofnarrativepastassignedtohim,and,inessence,this
adventureissimilartothatofcharacterswhohavefortunate
meetings,suchasSirBernardMassengereinÑSirTriamourÄ.While
hunting,OtesdeLileisvulnerable,butinsteadoffindinga
childhemeetsLybeaus;theparticularfateofthesusceptible
hunterisamatterofluck.
N020:000404430004
ÄÑBeuesofHamtounÄ;thefirstboar-huntandensuingmurder
occupylines193-276;thesecondboar-huntandfightoccupy
lines739-908.

N021:002404490003
ÄÑTheRomansofPartenayÄ,editedbyW.W.Skeat,EETS22,revised
edition(London,1866),lines134ff.

N022:002704550002
ÄÑGuyÄ,lines6451-6702.

N023:001504660004
ÄÑLybeausÄ,lines 1015-1113.



E
Ä
Lybaeus'sencounterwithOtesdeLileisnotplanned,but
sometimestheheroandhiscompanionsdeliberatelymakeuseofan
enemy'shuntingtooverthrowhim.ThusSirDegrevant'smenambush
anearlwhileheishunting,andGenerydesambusheshisrival
Gwynanwhilehetooishunting.ê04,24ÄInthefirstofthesecasesthe
settingisparticularlyappropriateasDegrevant'squarrelwith
theearloriginatesintheearl'sdestructionofDegrevant's
privateforestsduringhisabsence.InÑHaveloktheDaneÄ,Godard
ishuntingwhenfoundandconqueredbyRobert.ê03,25ÄMaloryagain
providesanexampleofthemotifatitsbest.Heusesthemotif
oftheunfortunatehuntfrequently,ê06,26Äbutinitsfinestformit
takesonamagicalquality.LaCoteMaleTayleexplainswhyhis
coatissoill-fashioned,givingacompactandvividaccountof
hisfather'sdeath:

Ihadafadir,anobleknyght,andasherodean-huntynguppona
dayhithappedhymtoleyhimdownetoslepe,andtherecama
knyghtthathadbenelongehisenemy.Andwhanhesawhewas
fasteonslepeheallto-hewhym,andthyssamecotehadmyfadir
onthattyme.(II,p.459,lines16-21)

Theunearthlyqualityoftheanecdoteliespartlyinthe
juxtapositionofthedistantlyvagueandpicturesque(thehunting
knightandhisnapunderthetree)withthevivid,harshact,and
partlyinthesyntax-theleisurelypaceandbalancegivethe
violentactnoprominence-andpartlyinthehunter'slackof
autonomyimpliedintheuseofthepassive'ÑhithappedhymÄto
leyhimdownetoslepe'.Theessenceofadventureis,ofcourse,
thatinitiallyit'happensto'acharacter,buthisresponseto
itisanimportantconstituentandrarelyishisautonomydenied
asentirelyasthatofLaCoteMaleTayle'sfather.

Wecouldconsidertheseunfortunatehunterstobevictimsofa
reversal-thehunterinanunguardedmomentbecomingthehunted.
Butinanothertypeofunfortunatehunt,pursuitisexchangedfor
betrayal.Thistypeofmotifconcentratesonthehunter'sabsence
fromhome.Maliciousortreacherousenemiesoftenexploithis
court'sorfamily'svulnerability.InÑGenerydesÄ,Ameloktakes
N024:003104790004
ÄÑTheRomanceofSirDegrevantÄ,editedbyL.F.Casson,EETS221
(London,1949),lines241ff;ÑGenerydesÄ,lines6009ff.


N025:004604830003
ÄÑTheLayofHaveloktheDaneÄ,editedbyW.W.Skeat,2ndedition,
revisedbyK.Sisam(Oxford,1915),lines2382ff.

N026:003504850006
ÄArthurbecomeslostandhishorsedies(I,41-2,31-5;1-21);
Arthur'sbattlewithAccalonfollowsahunt(I,137ff.);
Tristram'sfatherisimprisonedbyafaeryafteramagichunt
(I,371,24-31);theMaimedKingisinjuredafterahunt(II,
990,2-4).

E
Äoverthecityandusurpspowerwhiletheking(Generydes'
father)isouthunting,andlaterYvellabductsClarionaswhile
herfatherishunting.ê03,27ÄInÑTorrentofPortyngaleÄ,Desonell's
marriagetoanothersuitorisarrangedbyherparentswhile
Torrentisabsenthunting.ê02,28ÄInÑKingHornÄ,ameetingbetweenHorn
andRimenhildwhileherfatherishuntingislaterbetrayedto
thekingbyFikenhildasevidenceofanillicitaffairandHorn
issubsequentlyexiled.ê02,29Ä

Betrayalisnotinvariablyinvolvedinmisfortuneduringa
hunter'sabsence,thoughitiscommon.Nottreacherybut
unfortunatecoincidenceisatworkinÑIpomadonÄ:Cabanusisout
huntingwhenIpomadonreturnstotheSciliancourtdisguisedasa
foolishknightandleavesunrecognisedandridiculedbecausethe
onepersonwhowouldhaveknownhimisabsent.ê03,30ÄMisfortuneofa
moreseriouskindbefallswhenBevesofHamtoungoeshunting,
leavingIocyaninacavewithBonefaceandBeves'shorse:two
lionseatBonefaceandthehorse,thoughtheylieatIocyan's
feet,unabletoharmaroyalvirgin.ê02,31Ä

Theremaysometimesbeahintofcensureintheseexamples,
whetherornottreacheryisinvolved;whileabsenthunting,the
hunterisnegligentofhisduties-whetherashusband,guardian
orruler-andsoinvitesdisaster.Buthisill-luckhasasecond
aspect:hisimportanceisstressedasmisfortunecannotbe
counteredifheisaway.Thisennoblestheheroifheis
betrayed,andsimultaneouslybelittlestheenemieswhoexploit
thelapseinhisvigilance.Theimplicationisthattheywould
notdareconfronttheherohonourably.

Huntingcanoftenbeseensimplyas'preoccupation';thehunt
itselfisusuallyoflittlesignificanceandisnotdescribedin
detail.Butitistheconventionalmeansofremovingacharacter
fromthescene,anditisclearthattomedievalwritersand
audiencesitwasespeciallyappropriateandacceptableinthis
role.Thevulnerabilityofthehunterwassufficientlywell-
establishedforMalorytobeabletouseitinanepisodein
whichLaBeallIsodereprimandsTristramforhuntingunarmed:

'Imervaylememuchethatyeremembirnatyoureselffhowyebe
N027:002205150003
ÄÑGenerydesÄ,lines960-73,3774ff.


N028:002605170002
ÄÑTorrentofPortyngaleÄ,lines772-3.

N029:002305200002
ÑKingHornÄ,lines683ff.(LaudMS).

N030:004605270003
ÄÑTheLyfofIpomydonÄ,editedbyTadahiroIkegami,SeijoEnglish
Monographs21(Tokyo,1983),lines...

N031:003605310002
ÄÑBeuesofHamtounÄ,lines2375-2408.

E
Ähereinastraungecontrey,andherebemanyperelousknyghtes,
andwellyewotethatkyngeMarkeisfulloftreson.Andthatye
wollrydethustochaceandtohunteunarmed,yemyghtbesone
destroyed.'(II,p.683,lines6-10)

TheimaginativeprojectionofbetrayalinIsode'sarticulationof
theriskreliesheavilyupontheestablishedtraditionof
misfortune-andparticularlytreachery-befallingthe
susceptiblehunter.

Whileacharacterishuntingheisremovedfromthesafeand
civilisedsocietyofthecourtandwandersfreelyinthe
dangerouswildernessoftheforest.Thepathofthehunteris
controlledonlybythevagariesofthebeasthehunts,andchance
playsasubstantialpartintheoutcome.Thevulnerabilityofthe
hunterasitappearsinliteraturecertainlyechoesthedangers
ofthehuntinreallife,butiscompactedwithapsychological
vulnerabilitystemmingfromthehunter'sexclusionfromthe
familiarandorganisedinstitutionofsocietyandhispenetration
intothechaosoftheforest.Togohuntingcanbetochallenge
theunknown,adeclarationofreadinessandself-sufficiency,
whichmayhaveagoodorbadoutcome.Thevulnerabilityofthose
heleavesbehind,andtheweaknessoftheenemiesthatexploit
hisabsence,aretestamenttothehunter'spersonalstrengthand
importance.


ÑSeductionandabductioninthehunter'sabsenceÄ

Aspecialsubgroupoftheunfortunatehuntwarrantsseparate
considerationbecauseofthefrequencywithwhichitappears.
Itinvolvestheseductionorabductionofthehunter'swife,
daughterorbelovedwhileheishunting.Torrent'slossof
Desonell,andthebetrayalofHornandRimenhildarerelatedto
thismotif,whichencompassesexamplesofseduction,abduction
andelopement.Oneimportantdistinctionshouldbemadebetween
examplesofthismotif:insomeinstancesthewomaninstigatesor
iscomplicitinthedeceptionofthehunterandinotherssheis
anunwillingvictim.

Seductionduringthehunter'sabsenceisalwaysinstigatedbythe
woman.ThusinÑAmisandAmilounÄ,Belisaunttwiceattemptsto
seduceAmisinherfather'sabsencehunting,threateningwhenhe
refuseshertoclaimthathehasrapedher.ê02,32ÄAnotherexampleof
this'Potiphar'swife'motifoccursinÑGenerydesÄ.Serenydes
(Generydes'step-mother)triestoseduceGenerydeswhileher
husbandisawayhunting.Whenherejectsheradvances,shetears
herclothesandtellsthestewardthatGenerydesassaultedher.ê02,33Ä
N032:004305960002
ÄÑAmisandAmilounÄ,lines493-636.

N033:006306000002
ÄÑGenerydesÄ,lines477-515.

E
ÄThemostconcertedeffortofthissortismadebyBertilak'swife
inÑSirGawainandtheGreenKnightÄ,whoreturnsonthree
occasionstotempttheheroandmakesellipticalreferencetothe
traditionalthreatofrape.ê07,34ÄIntheinferiorrenderingofthis
story,ÑTheGreneKnightÄ,onlyoneseductionsceneisretainedand
thecorrespondinghuntingsceneisrelatedinconsiderablyless
detailthaninÑSirGawainandtheGreenKnightÄ.ê04,35ÄIneachof
theseexamples,themanisunwilling.Theonlyherotocomply
withthewoman'swishesisAmis,whorelentsonthesecond
occasion(underduress).Theencounterdevelopsintoanenduring
relationship,butthecoupleareobservedbythesteward,who
thenplotsagainstthem.

Intheseexamples,theburdenofguiltfallsonthehunter's
relative.Itisnotarbitraryfortunewhichactsagainsthim,but
thewomanherselfwhoundertakesacourseofactionpotentially
hurtfultothehunter.(Adaughter,ofcourse,isactingwithin
herrights,asthelastingrelationshipsinÑAmisandAmilounÄand
ÑKingHornÄdemonstrate.Thefatheristyrannical,jealous,or
overlyprotectiveinobjectingtoheractions.)Mostsimply,the
absenceofthefatherorhusbandprovidesthewomanwithan
opportunityshewouldnotnormallyhave.Inthecaseof
ÑGenerydesÄ,theaudiencealreadyknowsfromanearlierpartofthe
talethatSerenydesbetraysherhusband'strustinhisabsence.

Itisnotimmediatelyclearwhythewoman'sattempttoseducea
guestshouldbeconnectedwithhuntinginMiddleEnglishromance.
Thereisarudimentaryparallelinthebehaviourofthewomanand
herhusbandorfather-whilehepursuesanimalsshepursuesmen.
Butthis,perhapstheclosestapproachtothelove-huntinMiddle
English,remainsimplicitandundeveloped.ThepoetsofÑGenerydesÄ
andÑAmisandAmilounÄconcentratenotonthenotionofparallel
pursuits,butonthesenseofopportunitytobeseized.Itis
possiblethattheyconsideredtheequivalenceofthetwotypesof
pursuittooobvioustorequirecomment,butitismorelikely
thattheyweresimplynotinterestedinit.Pursuitis,
surprisingly,theelementofthehuntgivenleastexplorationand
developmentinMiddleEnglishhuntingmotifs.

InbothÑGenerydesÄandÑAmisandAmilounÄweareawarethatdecorum
isallowedtolapseonlyoncethehunterhasleftthehouseor
N034:002706040007
Ä'$earstifinnoghetoconstraynewythstrenk˛e,#ifyowlykez,Ñ
Ä$ifanyweresovilanous˛atyowdevayewolde.'Ñ

SirGawainandtheGreenKnightÄ,editedbyJ.R.R.Tolkienand
E.V.Gordon,revisedbyN.Davies(2ndedition,Oxford,1967),
fitt3,lines1496-7

N035:004706070004
ÄÑTheGreneKnightÄinÑBishopPercy'sFolioManuscript:Ballads
andRomancesÄ,editedbyF.J.Furnivall&J.W.Hales,4vols
(London,1867-8;reptd.Detroit,Ill.,1968),vol2.

E
Äcourt.Thecourtlyandchivalricvaluesepitomisedinthefigure
ofthehuntershouldbesharedbyhiswifeandhousehold.
However,itseemsthattheyarepresentonlyinhisperson.When
hetakescivilitytothebarbarousforestanddignifiesslaughter
withhiscourtliness,hetakesthesevirtuesawayfromhishome,
uncoveringaninstinctive,sometimesbarbarous,sexualityinhis
wifeordaughter,andoftenrevealingtreacheryinhisretainers.
Again,theennoblingpowerofhispresenceisstressedbythe
turnofevents.

Theromanceswhichinvolveanabductionconcentrateoncemoreon
thehunter'svulnerability.InÑBevesofHamptonÄ,thehunter's
absenceprovidesIocyanandBeveswithanopportunitytoescape
together.Herethereisnoseductionsceneasthecouplehave
beenbetrothedforyearsandIocyanismarriedtoIuoreagainst
herwill.BevesexploitstheabsenceofKingIuoretoretrieve
Iocyan.Theking'shuntplayslittlepartinthisepisode,the
onlyindicationofthereasonfortheking'sabsencebeing
Beves'sconversationwithapalmer:

'Palmer',asede,'wharis˛eKing?'
'Sire',aseide,'anhonting,
Wi˛kingesfiftene.(lines2053-5)

SimilarlywhenDesonellisforciblybetrothedtothekingof
Aragon'ssonwhileTorrentishuntingthereisnoseduction,her
parentssimplytakingadvantageofhisabsence:

WhyleTorrentanhuntyngwase,
Therofschuldhenotbewere.(lines772-3)

InanepisodeinÑGenerydesÄ,thehuntplaysamoreimportantpart
inthenarrative.ê02,36ÄTheepisodeisquitecomplex:SirYvell
tellsthesultantogohunting,claimingfalselythatthiswill
allowhimtoshowthatGenerydesplanstoescapewiththe
sultan'sdaughter,Clarionas.YvellfindsClarionasandhermaid,
Mirabell,andpromisestoleadthemtothesultan'shunt,but
takesthemthewrongway,intendingtoabductthem.WhenNanatell
rushespastchasingahart,Clarionastellshimofheralarmand
hegoestofindGenerydes.YvellpleadswithGenerydes,
persuadinghimthathe,ClarionasandMirabellshouldrestfor
thenightandallowYvelltoescape.Generydesagreesandbuilds
twolodges;Yvellgoestothesultanandofferstoshowhim
Generydesescapingwiththewomen.Yvellencourageshimtokill
Generydesandthesaddenedsultanclaimstohavedoneso,but
onlyexchangeshisswordforGenerydes'own.Hedeliversthe
sleepingClarionastoYvelltotakebacktocourtandcontinues
withhishunt.Yvellabductsher,takinghertohiswaitingship;
theplotisuncoveredwhenGenerydesandMirabellawakenand
reportthelosstothesultan.Thisisthemostcomplexmingling
N036:001706740002
ÄÑGenerydesÄ,lines3746ff.

E
Äofhuntingmotifstobefoundintheverseromances.Momentarily
withinYvell'sabductionduringthesultan'shuntisa"meeting
whilehunting"whenNanatellridesby,andinthesultan's
discoveryofGenerydesandClarionasandexchangeofswordsisan
echoofthesimilaractionbyKingMarkinTristanundŒsolde.
ThemainpointofinterestinthisepisodeisYvell'sinvention
ofaplotparalleltohisowntoattributetoGenerydes,andhis
manipulationofthehunt.Thehuntheinstigatesinorder,he
claims,togiveGenerydesanopportunitytoabductClarionas
simultaneouslyserveshisfictionandprovideshimwithareal
opportunitytoeffecthisownabduction.

Maloryagainfullyexploitsthepotentialoftheabductionmotif.
AbriefepisodeintheÑMorteDarthurÄmakesthemostconstructive
useofthepretextfortheman'sabsence.Inthenarrationofthe
elopementofSirDynas'smistress,thehunter'sloveofhunting
isabsorbedconvincinglyintothedepictionofthecharactersof
Dynasandhismistress.LikeLaCoteMaleTayle'saccount,this
againisacompleteandcompactnarrativedistillingthe
essentialqualitiesofthemotif:

...sirDynas...hadwithinthecastellaparamour,andsheloved
anothirknyghtbettirthanhym.AndsowhansirDynaswasoute
an-huntynge,sheslyppeddownebyatowell,andtokewithhirtwo
brachettis,andsosheyodetotheknyghtthatsheloved[andhe
herageyne]...AndwhansirDynascamhomeandmystehys
paramoureandhysbrachettes,thanwashethemorewrotherfor
hysbrachettis,morethanforhyslady.(II,p.550,lines17-25)

Hisconcernforhishoundsjustifieshisabsencehunting,lifting
itfromaconventionalnarrativedevicetoanexpressionof
personalidentity.Herspiteismanifestedinhertheftofhis
favouritehuntinghounds,butinturnhisgreaterdistressat
losinghishoundsthanhismistressallowsustoglimpsean
aspectofhispersonalitywhichmakesherelopementfully
understandable.Oursympathiesswitchfromsimplyfeelingforthe
desertedlovertoarecognitionofthecomplexinterplayof
emotions,includingspitefulnessandemotionalneglect,which
reallyliebehindanincidentasapparentlysimpleasthis.
Malorytransformstheconventionalmotiftointegrateitfully
intothescenario:thehunter'sabsenceisnotheresimply
convenient,butdemonstratestheinterestwhichatonceallows
hismistresstohurthimandwhichcontributestoherdesireto
elope.Maloryusesthecommonmotiftocreateaminiature
psychologicaldramashowingcharacter,emotionandmotivationin
anepisodewithlittleornoimportancetothecourseofthemain
action.

TheabductionofIsoldewhileTristramisawayhunting
againgivesthehuntmorethananincidentalplaceinMalory's
story.Tristram'sgreatloveofhuntingisstressedthroughout
thework,andisreiteratedhere,remindingusthatthisabsence
isincharacter.Themotifbecomesmorethansimplyformulaicor
conventional:Palomidesexploitsawell-knowncharacteristicof
ÄTristram,fittinghistreacherytoTristram'sbehaviourand
givingtheepisodeplausibilityinmorethanjusttherealmof
romanceconvention:

AndanonethekyngesenteuntosirTrystrames,butinnowysehe
woldenatbefounde,forhewasintheforestean-huntynge;for
thatwasallwayeshyscustom,butyfheusedarmes,tochaceand
tohunteintheforestes.(I,p.442,lines1-4)

Asintheverseromances,anoteofcensuremaybepresent-when
heshouldbeavailableincaseheisneeded,Tristramcannotbe
found.Thisperhapsforeshadowsthecriticismofthepositionof
huntinginTristram'sorderofprioritieslaterinMalory'swork.

Theubiquityoftheseductionorabductionmotifisapparentfrom
thenumberofcontrivedusesofit,allofwhichdependfortheir
plausibilityontheimmediateacceptabilityofthelikelihoodof
suchanevent.ThuswhenYvellliestothesultan,tellinghim
thatGenerydesplanstoabductClarionasduringthehunt,he
lendsGenerydes'ssupposedplotplausibilitybysituatingitina
hunt:theaudience(andperhapsthesultan)isaccustomedtosuch
occurrenceswithinromance,anditdoesnotsoundunlikely.Other
examplesinwhichcharactersexploitthefamiliarconventionof
abductionorseductionduringahuntarefoundinTheAvowingof
ArthurandKingHorn.InthefirstoftheseArthurtests
Bowdewynne'svownevertobejealousofhiswife.Hesends
Bowdewynnehuntingallnight,thenhidesaknightinhiswife's
bed(thoughnotallowinghimtodishonourher).Herevealsthe
knighttoBowdewynneonhisreturn,butBowdewynneisnot
jealous.InÑKingHornÄ,FikenhildwitnessesHornandRimenhild
exchangingvowsofloveintheking'sabsencehuntingandbetrays
them,sayingtheyarehavinganillicitaffair.Ineachcase,the
deceptionisfittedintotheestablishedandacceptedpatternsof
verseromanceinwhichseductionwhileaguardianisawayhunting
isplausiblebecausecommonplace.Themostsophisticated
contriveduseofthemotifisfoundinÑSirGawainandtheGreen
KnightÄ,wherethefamiliarityofthemotifisusedtoperpetuate
theaudience'sbeliefthatthesojourninBertilak'scastleisa
conventionalromanceepisode.

Notonlyseductionsareartificiallygiventhistypeof
convincingconventionalsetting.Other"chance"eventsduringa
huntmayalsobecontrivedbyoneofthecharactersinthe
romance.Forexample,GuyridesouttomeettheemperorofAlmain
whileheisknowntobehunting;Ipomadonsimilarlycontrivesto
meetthekingofSicily'accidentally'byhuntinginthesame
woodashim.ê02,37ÄGuyandIpomadonalsodisguisetheirmeetingsas
chanceencountersbyemulatingthepatternofaccidentalmeetings
intheverseromances.Heretheemphasisisoncreatingan
opportunityequivalenttothoseenjoyedfortuitouslybyother
N037:001207920002
ÄÑGuyÄ,lines....;ÑIpomydonÄ,lines

E
Ächaracters.InÑSirLaunfalÄ,theheroencourageshisfollowersto
explaintheirshabbyattirebytellingthekingthatthey
encounteredsomemisfortunewhilehunting.ê03,38ÄThemotifofthe
unfortunatehuntissofamiliarthattheexcuseisimmediately
plausible:theassociationofthehuntwithadventure,whether
goodorbadinitsoutcomeissopervasivethatevenacharacter
withinaromancecanconstructhisfictionsaroundit.

Thehunt'svictim

Thehunt'svictimisamotifgenerallyperceivedtobemore
commonthanitinfactis.Inpart,thismaybebecausethe
boundariesofthemotifareindistinct.Wecouldsaythat,ina
sense,anyhunterwhoencountersmisfortuneduringahuntisa
victimofthehunt.Butmoreprecisely,weshouldconsiderthe
victimwhoischasedbythehunt.

ThismotifcouldbetracedbacktothefateofActaeonandthe
traditionoftheWildHunt,butapartfromthespecificreligious
connotationsofthetruedevelopmentoftheWildHuntinMiddle
English,aninfrequentsecularmotifofthehunt'svictimshifts
theemphasisawayfromthetraditionalconcernwithflight.
Maloryusesthemotiffourtimes,andineachcaseitisto
furtherthedefinitionofcharacter.Themotifofthehunt's
victimrangesinmoodfromthecomictothedeeplyseriousand
symbolic.BothLauncelotandTristrambecomevictimsofthehunt
whentheyareaccidentallyinjuredbyarrowsaimedatananimal.
Tristramiswoundedwhilehuntingbeforehisappointedbattle
withPalomides.Thissimplydemonstratesthewell-recognised
dangersofthehunt;littleismadeoftheincidentitself,
thoughitisrecalledlaterwhenLancelotissimilarlyinjured.
Lancelotiswoundedinthebuttockbyahuntress,alsobeforea
battle.Theepisodeiscomic,treatingthenarrativedetailsat
greatlength,andshowingLancelotberatetheclumsywoman.
However,Launcelotdoesnotgiveintohiswoundasreadilyas
Tristramandridessuccessfullyinatournamentsoonafterwards.
Theparallelincidentsservetoilluminatethedifferencebetween
thetwocharactersintheirresponsetotherandomnessof
adventure.Launcelotacknowledgesthatheisunfortunate,
recognisingtheroleofchance,"Imaycallemyselffthemoste
unhappymanthatlyvyth,foreverwhanIwoldehavefaynyst
worshyptherebefallythmeeversomunhappythynge"(III,p.1106,
lines4-7),whereasTristram,whoseaccidentwearetoldwas"by
mysfortune",seekstoblamePalomides.Launcelothasgreater
autonomyandwill"taketheadventure"onhisowntermswhile
Tristramdoesnotasserthiswillovercircumstance.The
differencebetweenknightsoftheRoundTableisseenintheir
reactiontoanadventure,forthatwhichisordainedisnotthe
wholebutonlytheinitialcourseofevents;itsconsequencesare
N038:004207980003
ÄThomasChestre,ÑSirLaunfalÄ,editedbyA.J.Bliss(London,
1960),lines165-74.

E
Äshapedbyandrevealcharacter.

Elsewhere,Maloryusesthemotifofthehunt'svictimtomore
seriousintent.TheepisodeofMark'sfindingthemadTristram-
whichalludestothemotif-isdiscussedindetaillaterinthis
chapter;itisfirmlylinkedwiththecourtlyassociationsofthe
huntandtheirimportanceinrelationtoTristram'scharacter.
Malory'smostpoignantemploymentofthemotifisinthetaleof
Balyn,theknightofthetwoswords,andismetaphorical.Ashe
approachesthecastlewherehewillfightwithandslayhis
brother,Balynignorestwowarningsinhisdeterminationtotake
theadventure("Imayenottornenowageyneforshame,andwhat
aventureshallefalletome,beitlyfordethe,Iwilletakethe
adventurethatshallecometome",I,p.89,lines2-4).Ashe
presseson,committinghimselftohisfate,hehears"anhorne
bloweasithadbenthedetheofabest.'Thatblast,'said
Balyn,'isblowenforme,forIamthepryse,andyetamInot
dede"'(I,p.88,lines10-12).Thesoundoftheendofthehunt
markstheapproachingendoftheadventureandoflifeforBalyn.
TheadventurehastakenBalyn,andhisdeathisnowcertain,
dictatedbyeventsandhisowncharacterwhichdetermineshis
responsetothem-"Merepenteth...thateverIcamwithinthis
countrey;butImayenottornenowageyneforshame"(I,p.89,
lines1-2).Adventureandthehuntareequated,Balynisthe
quarryofthehuntandthevictimoftheadventure.Againthe
motifcontributestothedepictionofBalyn'scharacter:heis
fullyawareoftheconsequenceofhisactions,andisimpelled
towardshisdoombyhisobstinatedeterminationto"takethe
adventure"toitsconclusion.

Otherwritersalludetothemotifofthehunt'svictimless
fruitfully.TheverseromanceÑWilliamofPalerneÄusesthemotif
twice.Inthefirst,theinfantWilliamis"tracked"whenstolen
bythewerewolf.Later,WilliamandMeliordisguisethemselvesin
bear-skinswhenescapingfromherhomeland;theyarechasedbya
hunt,butthepartyisdrawnoffbythewerewolf.InÑTorrentof
PortyngaleÄ,Desonellloseshersonstoagriffinandalion,
thenfleesinterrorfromahuntbeforebeingfoundbytheking
ofJerusalemwhoisalsoouthunting.ê11,39ÄNeitheroftheseromances
developsthemotiftoagreatdegree;theyreferobliquelytothe
traditionoftheWildHunt,andexploitthesamesentimentsof
N039:003708830011
ÄAsshewalkidthana-lone,
Shesyelordisonhuntynggone,
Nerehemsheyedefullsone.

Thiscarfullladycriedfaste,
Thansheherdthishornesblaste
Bytheyatisgone,
Butranintoawildernes,
Amongistbeeststhatwyldwes,
Fordrede,shesholdbeslone.(ÑTorrentÄ,lines2020-28)

E
Äfearofpursuitbutwithoutexploringthepotentialofthe
motif.ê23,40Ä

Thoughthemotifofthehunt'svictimwouldseemtobear
considerablepotentialforexcitingnarrativedevelopment,itis
largelyneglectedbyMiddleEnglishwriters.Whereitisusedat
all,itdoesnotenjoyprominenceinaromance.Itwouldappear
thatthis,alongwiththelove-huntandChrist'shunt,wasa
motifthatdidnotappealtothemedievalEnglishimagination.
Interestingly,allthreeofthesefocusonpursuitasthecentral
elementofthehunt,andpursuitandflightaremost
conspicuouslyignoredbytheMiddleEnglishwritersinfavourof
courtliness.

Thehuntandcharacter:definitivemotifs

Themultifariousassociationsofthehuntmadeitarichsource
forthewriterwhowishedtoconstructacharacter'skeleton'
whichhecouldgraduallypadoutwithflesh.Theambiguityofthe
hunt'sstatus,itsuneasycombinationofcourtlyfacadeand
primitivestruggleagainstnature,yieldedcontrasting
suggestionswhichweredevelopedintocorrespondinglycontrasting
characteristicsforthehunter.Theferocityoftheboar-hunter's
adversaryyieldsanauraofspecialbraveryforthehunter,while
thesaferandmoremannereddeer-huntcametoepitomisecourtly
delicacyandaccomplishment.Butcourtlydelicacydoesnotalways
siteasilywiththemilitaryqualitiesdemandedofahero,and
althoughsuccessfullyintegratedinthefiguresofthecourtly
hunterandtheproficienthunter,thedeer-huntersometimesslips
N040:000608870023
ÄInÑTorrentÄ,themotifrepresentstheextremevulnerabilityand
isolationofthewomancastoutfromhumansociety,butin
ÑWilliamofPalerneÄtheuseofthemotifissimultaneouslymore
comicandmoresophisticated.WilliamandMeliordisguise
themselvesasanimalsandareaidedbyawerewolf,partofa
complexinterplayofhumanandanimalqualities,ofwhichthe
huntisonlyapart.Briefly,allthe"good"charactersreject
normalhumansocietyatsomepoint;theyaredistinguishedby
theiruseofanimaldisguisesandtheirlifeoutsidethecourt
societieswhichareseenaspredominantlymalignant,corrupt
andunhealthy.ThepursuitofWilliamandMeliordisguisedas
bearsbythehuntingpartyisoneinaseriesofincidents
demonstratingtheferocityofhumanityandthenobilityofthe
part-animalcharacters.Thetransitionsfromhumantoanimal
andbackagainaremarkedbyactsofviolenceorspiteandof
compassionrespectively,andcannotbeeffecteddirectly;
William'smotherhastodisguiseherselfasadeerinorder
tocommunicatewiththelovers.Allencountersbetweenthe
part-animalcharactersandthecourtaremarkedbythehuman
barbarityexemplifiedinthehuntscene.Themotifofthe
hunt'svictimsformsapartofthiswiderexplorationofthe
behaviourofmentowardsoneanotherandtowardsanimals.

E
Äintoridiculeandparody.AswesawinChapter2,medieval
culturedemandedthathuntingoccupyasuitableplaceinman's
concerns.Thehunterwhorelinquisheshishuntingtopursuea
loveaffairorachivalricadventureisapplauded,buthewho
persistsinhisuntimelyleisureactivitybecomestheobjectof
scornandderision.Theparodictreatmentsoftheproficient
hunterfocusonthecharacter'sfailuretorecognisetheproper
placeofthehunt,introducingchargesofcowardiceand
foolishnesstoexplainthefault.

Ñ
ÄDefinitivemotifs(1):Militaryvirtueandthe'epic'boar-hunt

Onehuntwhichneverresultedinridiculeistheboar-hunt.The
heroicbraveryoftheboar-huntercanbetracedinClassicaland
Celtictraditions,andmanifesteditselftoointheconventional
adoptionoftheboarasthepersonalsymbolofawarrior.ê09,41Ä

Althoughtheassociationsofmartialprowessandbraveryarenot
diminishedinthemedievalportrayaloftheboar-hunt,thevery
precisenarrativestructurewhichevolvedinMiddleEnglish
depictionsofitrevealsacompactionoffurtherconnotations
intothesingleimage.InMiddleEnglishromance,theepic
braveryoftheboar-hunteristemperedwithcourtlyactivity
whichraisestheepisodefromsimplemonster-slayingtoa
demonstrationofsocialskillmanifestingthedifferentfacetsof
thehero'sexcellence.Theboar-huntisthususedtodefinethe
characterofthehunterintermsoftraditionalmasculinity,but
alliedwithcourtlyprowess.Considerablenarrativedevelopment
characterisesthemedievalmotif;itismarkedlymore'present'
intheforegroundoftheromancethanarethemotifsthatsimply
introduceanadventure.

Boar-huntsfallintotwocategories:thehuntforaninfamous
boar,andtheappearanceofaparticularlyfierceboarwhichhas
notbeendeliberatelysought.Struggleswithinfamousboarshelp
toenhancethecharactersofBevesofHamtoun,EglamourofArtois
andKingArthurinÑTheAvowyngofArthurÄ.ê05,42ÄInthelasttwoof
N041:005709310009
ÄMarcelleThiÈbaux,"TheMouthoftheBoarasaSymbolin
MedievalLiterature",ÑRomancePhilologyÄ22(1968-9),281-99.
Ontheboar-huntasanepicfeature,seep.289:"Thechivalric
herowilloftenpursuetheallegedlycourtlypastimeof
huntinginamannerthatrecallstheepicbusinessofwar.By
sendinghisheroonaboar-hunt,amedievalauthorprocuredan
especialsenseofmilitaryurgency."


N042:004109520005
ÄÑBeuesofHamtounÄ,lines739-908;ÑEglamourÄ,lines364ff.;ÑThe
AvowingofArthurÄ,inÑSirAmadaceandTheAvowingofArthurÄ,
editedbyC.Brookhouse,ÑAnglisticaÄ15(Copenhagen,1968),
lines121-2??

E
Äthese,thetaskisundertakenspecificallytoprovetheskillof
thehunter:Eglamourbecauseitisan'impossibletask'setto
testhisworthinessasahusbandforChristabell,andArthurin
ordertofulfilhisownproudvow.Itmaybethattheboar-hunt
servestoshowhowcertaintypesofmotivationcanachieve
greatereffectsthanwouldnormallybeexpected,sothepowerof
theking'sprideandofEglamour'sloveenablethemtoperform
theirtasksandaremanifestedintheiraccomplishments.Butin
eachinstance,thesuccessofthehunterestablishescertain
charactertraitswhichcouldonlyberevealedthroughaction.

Beves'sadventureisofadifferentnature,beingpromptedbythe
socialneedtoridtheneighbourhoodoftheboar.Itoccursat
thebeginningofBeves'schivalriccareerandestablishesnot
onlypersonalvalourbutasocialroleforBeves.Hisglorious
figureridingouttodobattlewiththebeastelicitsIocyan's
love,hissubsequentfightwiththeangryfosterswhofeelhehas
stolentheirthunderestablisheshimasavictorovermenaswell
asanimals,andhissuccessperformsausefulsocialfunctionin
endingthetroublesomemaraudingoftheboar.Theensuingbattle
withthefostersgivesBevesanopportunitytoexercisehisnew-
foundmilitaryskillsonhumanadversaries,andthoughhis
battleisunconventionalandnotchivalric,itisanimportant
stageinhisdevelopment.Thisisthesecondboar-huntinÑBevesÄ;
inthefirst,Beves'sfatherissenttohuntaboartoprovide
medicineforhiswifeandiskilledbyherlover.Herethedanger
oftheboar-huntisnotoftheusualkind,buttheconventional
associationsofthehuntdemonstratehisloveforhiswife:heis
willingtoundertakethenotoriouslydangeroushuntonher
behalf.Thisfirsthuntgivesaspecialsignificancetotheboar
theyoungBeveskillsashisintroductiontoheroism,
accomplishingagreaterfeatthanthatwhichdefeatedhisfather.

Whentheboarhuntedisnotaspecific,notoriousbeast,the
characteristicconnectionofthehuntwithadventureisalloweda
moredominantrole.Wecanlookattwoexamplesinwhichaboar-
huntleadstoameetingandinitiatesthemainadventureofa
romance.Inthesepoems,theboar'sabilitytorunbeforethe
huntersforalongtimeisemployedbythepoetstodraweach
herointoisolationpreparatorytotheonsetoftheadventure.
PartonopeofBloisiseventuallyledtoMelior'scastleafter
becominglostwhilehuntingaboar.Sincetheboarmustdisappear
intothewoodinordertoleadPartonopeintotheforest,the
poetintroducesthisepisodebyhavingPartonopefirstkill
anothergiganticboar.BythismeansheestablishesPartonope's
heroismwithamotifdefiningcharacterbeforeusinganarrative
motiftodrawPartonopeintohisadventure.IntheÑRomansof
PartenayÄ,theferocityoftheboarwhichkillsAmerieanddraws
RaymonddeepintotheforestdemonstratesRaymond'sheroism.A
furtherdimensionisaddedtothemasculinehero,however.
Raymondisshowntobegreatlydistressedbythedeathofhis
lord,althoughcompassionisnotgenerallyacharacteristic
affordedmuchattentioninthedepictionofamasculinehero.The
poetskilfullycombinestheconnotationsoftraditionalmasculine
Ävalourwithanelementofcompassionateinvolvementwhich
preparesthegroundforthemovingemotionalscenesandenduring
devotiondepictedlaterintheromance.

InÑGuyofWarwickÄandMalory'sÑMorteDarthurÄ,theplotismoved
onbytheboar-huntinanotherway.Guychasesalargeboarinto
aprivateforestandkillsit,butasaconsequencehasto
undertakefurtherbattles.Theboar-huntisGuy'slastknightly
combat(exceptingaminordragon-slayingincident)beforehis
marriagetoFelice.Theepisodewhichshouldheraldfulfilment
fortheromancehero,soonturnssour.Fiftydaysafterthe
wedding,Guyisfilledwithremorsethathisknightlydeedshave
beendedicatedtoFeliceandnottoGod.Heabandonsherand
theirunbornsonandlivesasChrist'sknight,acceptingno
rewardorfameandfinallylivingasahermit,onlyallowinga
reunionwithhiswifeafewminutesbeforehisdeath.Thehuntis
acrucialturningpointintheromance,andisthemostfully
developedofthefivehuntingmotifsinthepoem.Mostofthese
motifsconcernthehunt'sroleinchivalricadventure:threeof
theminvolvemeetings,andafourthestablishesanearlylink
betweenhunting,courtlinessandchivalrywhenGuywinsa
tournamentprizeofhuntingequipment.Beforetheboar-hunt,
therearenoassociationswithdangerorviolence,thehuntis
neversinisternorbringsmisfortune.Theboar-huntisthefinal
huntingmotif,anditendsinmisfortunewithunnecessary
bloodshedandacrimony,asignificantlydismalendtoanepisode
whichbeginsbycombiningepicfightandspectacularhunt.
PotentiallyanopportunitytocelebrateallaspectsofGuy's
chivalry,thecentrallypositionedboar-huntbecomesinsteada
turningpointintheromanceasthebasisandidealsofchivalric
conductarecalledintoquestion.The'epic'huntturnssour,the
occupationofhuntingisitselfdiscreditedandwithitthewhole
secularchivalricfabricoftheromancewithwhichitwas
associated.Theidealsandaimsofnormalchivalryarerealised
butthenimmediatelyshowntobevaluelessasGuyleaveshiswife
andson,rejectingworldlygloryandblissinfavourofamore
severeachievement.Theboar-huntanditsattendantbattles
preparethereaderforthisreversal,underminingthelight-
heartedheroismofGuy'searlierexploits,themartialand
courtlyaspectsofwhicharetraditionallycombinedintheboar-
hunt.ThesignificanceofandmotivationbehindGuy'sactions
changeradicallyafterthisreversal,thoughinsubstancehis
actionscontinuetobeofasimilartype.Guywinsdivinefavour
afterhischange,butthesecondhalfofthetaletreatsof
bitternessanddisillusionment.Itnecessarilyinvolves
considerablepaintoGuy'swife,sonandfriends,whichisnot
fullyreconciledwiththespiritualbenefitGuyderivesfromhis
change.Theboar-huntstandspoisedonthebrinkofGuy'sown
disillusionment,butmarksthebeginningofdisillusionmentfor
thereader,andappearstypicallyasafigureofallthesecular
courtlinesswhichhasgonebefore.Overall,theseveralusesof
thehuntinthepoemdemonstrateitsfickleness,turningfrom
fortunatetounfortunateassociationswithnoapparentwarningor
cause,andfollowtheromance'sdevelopingnotionofsecular
Ächivalry,frompleasantamusementthroughusefulaction,to
disillusionmentandreplacementwithanovertlyChristian
chivalry.TheÑGuyÄ-poetthusemploystheconventionalassociations
oftheboar-hunttoraisehisherotothehighestpointof
chivalricachievementbeforeimmediatelyturningtheconventions
againstthemselvesinamasterlyreassessmentofthechivalric
ethic.

Adifferenttypeofcharactertransformationismarkedbyaboar-
huntinÑMorteDarthurÄ.Here,though,themoveisnotfromthe
courtlyinstitutiontosolitude,butfrommadnessandsocial
isolationtowardsreintegrationinthecourtlyworldsymbolised
bythehunt.Lancelot'scharacterhasalreadybeenestablished,
andthehuntisusedtoshowthebeginningofhisreturntohis
formercharacterratherthantodefineitfromscratch.Whilemad
intheforest,Lancelotwitnessesaboar-hunt.Whenoneofthe
huntersdismountsandleaveshisspearnearhimLauncelottakes
thespearandpursuestheboarhimself,finallykillingitbut
beinginjuredintheprocess(II,p.821,lines1-20).The
incidentisbizarre,anddoesnotsharethecarefullyplanned
plausibilityofMalory'sotherusesofhuntingmotifs.Notonly
isitincongruousthatthemadmanshouldentertheviolenthunt
andactasaconventionalwarriorhero,buttheeventsleadingup
toLauncelot'scombatareextraordinary,leavingmanyquestions
unanswered:whyshouldthehunterdismountandallowthemadman
totakehisswordandhorse?whatbecomesoftherestofthe
huntingparty?howcanLauncelotovertaketheboarwhenthe
houndscannotandtheprevioushunteronthesamehorsecould
not?Suchanomaliesinanarrativearecharacteristicofdreams
withinMalory'swork,butnotofhisportrayalofactionwhichis
tobetakenliterally.Heretheysuggestthattheepisodeis
symbolic.ThehuntoccursjustbeforeLauncelotbecomesthefool
atthecastleofCorbynwhereheisfinallyrecognisedbyElayne.
Inhiscombatwiththeboarandhissubsequenttreatmentofthe
hermit,theformerchivalriccharacterofLauncelotandhismad
personaarecombined.Thehunttestifiestohisfundamental
bravery,strengthandconventionalheroismpreparatorytothe
recognitionofhisintrinsicqualitybythecourtofCorbynwho
"thoughttheyneversawesogoodlyaman"and"demedthathehad
beneamanofworshyp"(II,p.822,lines31-5).

Betweentheboar-huntandtheidentificationofLauncelotthe
expressionofhismadnesschangesform,beingatonetimea
resultofhispainfulinjury,atanotheraresultofhishunger
("fordefauteofsustenauncehewaxedmorewooderthanhewas
aforetyme"II,p.822,lines16-18).Afterthisheisdressedandtreated
asafoolbyothers,butthisinvolveshiminarecognisablerole
incourtlysocietyinwhichhismadnessisgivenanacceptable
externalexpression.Hisreintegrationintochivalricsociety
beginswithhisinvolvementinthehunt,acivilisedoccupation,
andprogressesthroughhisadoptionasafoolwithitsattendant
courtlyclothesandacknowledged,thoughlow,status,tohis
finalrecognitionandhealing.Theactofhealingisitself
magical,ametaphorfortheincomprehensiblereturnofsanity,
Äbutithasbeenpreparedforsubtlybythenarrativein
Launcelot'sreintroductiontonormalsocietyanditscourtly
activities.

Theextendednarrativeattentiongiventotheboar-huntin
medievalromanceallowedthedevelopmentofarecognisable
structurerepeatedfromoneexampletoanother.Thedepictionof
theboar-huntisverystylised;itadaptsrealhuntingpractice
toamplifythebraveryandstrengthofthehero,andcombines
elementsfamiliarfromthetraditionalpatternoffightsbetween
twowarriorswithelementsfromthecourtlyhunt.

Theboarisinvariablykilledbytheherowithaswordandon
foot.Thisisclearlymoredangerousthankillingitwitha
spear,whetheronfootoronhorseback,whichwascommon
contemporarypractice.TheÑLivredechasseÄacknowledgesthatit
ismorenobletokilltheboarwithaswordthanwithaspear,
"letuerdel'espeesoitplusbelechoseetplusnoble"(ch.53,
p.231),butacknowledgesthedangeranduncertaintyoftackling
theanimalonfootwithasword:"S'ilveultdescendreauxabaiz,
c'estplusse¸rechosedel'espieuquedel'espee."(ch.53,
p.232:Ifhewishestoalightattheabay,aspearisamore
certainaidthanisasword).Intheromances,theactofkilling
aboarwithaswordmagnifiesthecourageandstrengthofthe
hunter,stressinghismasculinequalities.Thereisnoevidence
tosuggestthathuntingtheboaronfootwithaswordwasever
practisedasademonstrationofvalourinreallife,anditwould
havebeenlessthanprudenttoattemptsuchadisplayofbravado.
Inthemajorityofinstances,thelackofrealisminthisdetail
isnotofanygreatinterest,butinthecaseofBertilak'sboar-
huntinÑSirGawainandtheGreenKnightÄthetechniqueiscombined
withhighlydetailedandrealistichuntingscenes.Theeffectis
tomagnifystillfurtherthevalourofBertilak,forhereisa
hunterwhoisinmanyrespectsveryrealandyetisstillcapable
ofthemythicalactofslayingtheboaronfootwithhissword.
TheremovalofBertilakfromtherealmofconventionalromanceby
theotherwiserealisticdepictionofahuntenhancestheeffect
ofthisaccomplishment.

Stylisationextendsfurtherthanthemeansofslaughter,however.
ThepatternofeventsinÑBevesofHamptonÄrevealsastructure
whichunderliesalltheboar-huntmotifs,comprisingelementsof
battleandelementsofcourtlyprocedure.Thebattlesequencehas
sevenprincipalstages:

1)Thechallenge
2)Thecomingtogetherofmanandbeast
3)Thebreakingofthespear[anddeathofthehorse]
4)Thedrawingofthesword
5)Theprolongedfight
6)Thehero'sprayer
7)Thedeathoftheboar

Thispatternhasstrongechoesoftherepetitivepatterningfound
ˇÄinportrayalsofbattlesbetweenhumancombatants.ê04,43ÄInÑSir
EglamourofArtoisÄthehunterisonhorsebackandtheboarkills
thehorse.Allstagesarepresentexceptthefirstandlast.The
AvowingofArthuralsoinvolvesthedeathofthehorse.Before
thecombattheboarwhetsitstusksandrumbles,threateningthe
king.Thefighttakesplaceinsixstagesand,iftheboar's
threatisconsideredachallenge,theencounterisascompleteas
thatinÑBevesÄ.Ineachromancetheheroisbroughtneartodeath
duringthebattle,asinconventionalhumancombats.

Theencounterbetweenmanandbeast,thoughportrayedlikea
battle,ispresentedwithinthestructureofahunt.Hunting
procedureformstheprologuetotheencounterandisresumedwhen
theboarisrituallydecapitatedandbrokenup.ThusBevesarms
himself,ridesintotheforest,blowshishornandseekshis
adversary,thenfindstheboar'sdenlitteredwiththebonesof
itspreviousvictims.AfterthecombatBevesdecapitatestheboar
andsetsitsheadonthetruncheonofhisspear.Heblowsthe
prisetoannouncehissuccessandreferstotheepisodeas
hunting:

ﬁanneasettehorntomou˛e
Andblew˛eprisasewelkou˛e,
Sogladhewasforishonting.(lines829-31)

AsimilarstructureappearsinÑTheAvowingofArthurÄ.Theking
declareshisintentionintheterminologyofthehuntandsets
offwithhishounds,whichareattackedbytheboar.ê04,44ÄTheking's
responseistousetheappropriatehuntingtermstoencouragehis
hounds(lines169-71).Afterkillingtheboar,thekingundoesit
properly(lines254-62).

InÑSirEglamourofArtoisÄ,theframeworkofthehuntisreduced.
Theboar-andhart-huntsaretaskssettoEglamourinorderto
defeathimandsofrustratehisintentionsofmarryingChristabel
andareequatedwiththeothertasks,killinggiants.The
etiquetteandassociationsofthehuntplayonlyaminorpartin
thetwohunts,butaresuperficiallymaintained;afterkilling
thehart,"ﬁepriseheblewefullschyrlle"(line300,Cotton
MS),andEglamourandtheking'sknightsundotheboar
traditionally(line490).

Thepatternofanepicbattleinterpolatedintoahuntisvaried
whentheboarisnotaparticularlynotoriousanimal,butthe
N043:005011690004
ÄJ.E.Martin(Weiss),"StudiesinSomeEarlyMiddleEnglish
Romances",unpublishedPhDdissertation,CambridgeUniversity,
1967,pp.274-6.

N044:005211960004
ÄÑAvowingofArthurÄ,lines117-264.



E
Äoutlineofbothelementsremains.Thecombatisnotformally
structured,andoccupiesonlyafewlines.Instead,greater
emphasisisplacedontheopeningofthehunt-thebayingand
questingofthehounds,thehornmusicandthedepartureofthe
huntingparty.Thisisfollowedbytheisolationofthecentral
figure(s)andfinallytheconfrontationwiththeanimal.Theboar
isdispatchedquickly.ê21,45ÄIntheÑRomansofPartenayÄ,Raymondis
besidehimselfwithgriefandneglectstoundotheboar,butGuy
undoeshisquarrycorrectlyandsoundstheappropriatehorn
signals.ê05,46
Ä
Theboar-hunt,then,whilefrequentlyservingthesamefunction
asthenarrativemotifsdiscussedaboveinhelpingtomovethe
plotalongtothenextstage,hastheadditionalimportant
functionofdevelopingaspectsofthehunter'scharacter.The
boar-hunterisaparagonofmilitaryprowess:heisbrave,
strong,dynamicyetalsoequippedwiththeusualcourtlygraces
ofthehunter,demonstratedinhisproperattentiontothe
treatmentofthecarcaseandtheframingofthecombatwithinthe
etiquetteofthecourtlyhunt.

Theboar-huntisnottheonlyhuntwhichmaybeusedtodefineor
refinethecharacterofaprotagonist.Itis,however,theonly
huntwhichpresentsanunambiguouscombinationofcourtlyand
militaryvirtues.Thedeer-hunt,thoughredolentofcourtliness,
could,asweshallnowsee,beusedasascathingcondemnationof
N045:002212190021
Ä Allethedaytheysparenoghte
Hymtohvntethorowethykeandthynne,
Tylletheboore,fulleweryofrenne,
A-yenEuynthebaya-bodde.
Partonope,thereashestode,
Pulludowtehysswyrdelycheamanne,
Andfresshelytothysboreheranne.
Be-twynwasthenagrettestryfe,
Butteyetthebooretherelostehyslyfe.

ÑPartonopeofBloisÄ,editedbyA.T.Bodtker,EETS109(London,
1912),lines545-53.

Hetokehysswyrdeinhyshande:
Theboorehymsyeandcamerennande.
Gyeon@eryggesmotehymsoo,
Thathysbodyfelleintwoo.(ÑGuyofWarwickÄ,lines6455-8.)




N046:000812220005
ÑGuyÄ,lines6460,6465-6;theearlrecognisesthatthehorn
signalindicatesthedeathofananimal,andthatsomeonehas
'Takyn...somewyldebeste'inhisforest(line6470).


E
Äthehunter'smilitaryskillsorschemeofpriorities.

Definitivemotifs(2):Tristan,Ipomadonandthefigureofthe
proficienthunter

Incourtlyliterature,thegoodknightisinevitablyaproficient
hunterandhuntingformsapartofhiseducationevenwhenitis
nottobesignificantlaterinhisstory.Therearetwotypesof
referencetothefigureoftheproficienthunter.Byremarking
thattheheroisanaccomplishedhunter,anauthorcanrapidly
attributetohimthecourtlyskillsandprowessasawarrior
whichdistinguishthegreatknight.Suchacommentmayappearto
beathrowawayline,abriefobservationwhichbringstothe
characteraseriesofassociationsandskillswhichthereadercan
immediatelyappreciateandapprove.Butofmoreinterestthan
thistypeofcommentaretheromancesinwhichthehero'shunting
skillplaysanimportantpartintheplot.Ipomadon,Tristanand
RoswallinÑRoswallandLillianÄaresuchfigures,andalthough
huntingisimportantindifferentwaysineachcharacter'sstory,
therearesignificantsimilaritiesinitsuse.

Thesethreearethemostinterestingusesofthemotifofthe
proficienthunter.Theproficienthunterisalwaysaparagonof
knightlyvirtueandthereforeworthyoflove;theprincessof
CalabrialovesIpomadonmorewhensheseeshisproficiencyin
hunting,andIocyanfallsinlovewithBevesasheridesoutto
huntthegreatboar.Herethehunterrepresentsthecompleteand
perfectknightanditisthisfigurewhichrightlyinspireslove
ratherthanspecificallyhisproficiencyinthehunt.Othertexts
mayuseahero'shuntingskilltogiveaplausiblereasonfor
itemsinthenarrative,ormayincludehuntingskillinan
accountofafigure'sachievementsasabriefandeffectiveway
ofevokingafullcourtlycharacter.ThusSirDegrevant'sloveof
huntingexplainswhyhehasfinehuntingparksandisdrivento
violencewhenaneighbourdestroystheminhisabsence,andin
Lydgate'sStEdmundtheproficienthunter,Lothbrocus,is
murderedbythejealousBern,whoresentshispopularityand
success.ê03,47ÄOntheotherhand,thenarrativefunctionof
Bertilak'shuntingproficiencyinÑSirGawainandtheGreenKnightÄ
isquiteseparatefromtheaimofshowinghimtoberobustand
proficientincourtlyskillsbythethreehuntingscenes.Even
thepooradaptationÑTheGreneKnightÄretainsthehuntingskillof
theGreenKnightalthoughthehuntsarereducedtolittlemore
thanaformulaicexpressionofhispreoccupationduringthe
seductionofGawain.

ThemostfamousofallhuntersinmedievalliteratureisTristan.
Referencestohisexpertiseasahunterareoftencasual,
suggestingthathisreputationwaswell-establishedandfamiliar.
N047:000812760003
ÄJohnLydgate,ÑStEdmundÄ,editedbyC.HorstmanninÑAltenglische
LegendenneueFolgeÄ(Heilbronn,1881),BookI,lines1047-50.

E
ÄEvenasearlyasChrÈtien'sCligÈs(lines1170-76),Tristan's
huntingappearstohavebeenproverbial:

Sisotplusd'escremieetd'arc
QueTristanzliniÈsleroiMarc,
Etplusd'oisiax,etplusdechiens.ê04,48Ä

(Heknewmoreoffencingandarchery
ThandidTristan,thenephewofKingMark
Andmoreofbirds,andmoreofhounds.)

ThefirstversionoftheTristanlegendextantisafragmentof
theÑTristanÄofThomasofBritain(1155-85),butthisdoesnot
includethepartsofthestoryinwhichhuntingepisodes
feature.ê14,49ÄTheprincipalversionsofthelegenddevelopedintwo
branches,onefromThomas'spoemandtheotherfromthelostwork
ofLiKievres.TheimportanttextsintheThomasbranchare
GottfriedvonStrassburg'sTristanundŒsolt(c.1210),the
NorwegianÑTristramsSagaokÕsondarÄof"BrotherRobert"(1226)
andtheMiddleScotsromanceofÑSirTristremÄ(1295-1320),andit
isinthesethatTristan'shuntingismostimportant.However,
huntingisanimportantpartofTristram'sreputationinMalory's
ÑBookofSirTristramdeLyonesÄ,whichbelongstothesecond
branch.

InthetextsoftheThomasbranch,themostimportant
huntingepisodeoccurswhentheyoungTristanarrivesonthe
Cornishcoastforthefirsttime.ThefirstEnglishmenhe
encountersareapartyofhunters,abouttobutcherdeerthey
havekilled.Tristan,horrifiedattheunsophisticatedtechniques
theyproposetouse,instructstheminthepropermannerof
"breaking"thedeer.Thehunters,impressedbytheyounghero,
takehimbacktoMark'scourtwiththemandsointroducehimto
thesceneofhisfutureadventures.Huntingislaterofdiffering
N048:003612930004
ÄChrÈtiendeTroyes,ÑCligÈsÄ,editedbyAlexandreMichas,ÑLes
RomansdeChrÈtiendeTroyesÄII,CFMA84(Paris,1957),lines
2748-51.

N049:000813020014
ÄThedevelopmentoftheTristanlegendhasbeentracedseveral
times:seeRobertJ.Blanch,"TheHistoryandProgressofthe
TristanLegend,DrusttoMalory",ÑRevuesdesLanguesVivantesÄ
35(1969),129-35;GottfriedvonStrassburg,ÑTristanund
ŒsoltÄ,editedbyAugustCloss,GermanMedievalSeries,
(Oxford,1944),xviii;A.G.vanHamel,"Tristan'sCombatwith
theDragon",ÑRevueCeltiqueÄ41(1924),331-49;Helaine
Newstead,"TheOriginandGrowthoftheTristanLegend",and
FrederickWhitehead,"TheEarlyTristanPoems",inÑArthurian
LiteratureintheMiddleAgesÄ,editedbyR.S.Loomis(Oxford,
1959),pp.123-33andpp.134-44;GertrudeSchoepperle,2vols,
ÑTristanandIsolt:AStudyoftheSourcesoftheRomanceÄ(New
York,1960).

E
Ädegreesofimportanceinthevariousredactionsofthelegend,
butisfrequentlyreferredtowhentheloversarelivinginexile
intheforestwhereTristanhunts,eitherforfoodorpleasure.

Itisdifficulttoplacetheemergenceofhisreputationasa
hunterintheevolutionofthecharacterofTristan.ê10,50ÄThe
earliestaccountofTristan'sinstructionofthehuntsmenappears
inGottfried'spoem,andithasgenerallybeenassumedthatthis
wastakendirectlyfromThomas'spoem.ê06,51ÄTheNorwegianprose
ÑSagaÄ,alsodevelopedfromThomas'sversion,givesashorter
treatmentofthehuntingepisodeinCornwall;thismayinreality
representtheextentofThomas'scontribution.WhetherGottfried
expandedThomas'saccountofthehunt,ortheNorwegiansaga-
writerreducedit,itseemsclearthatthehuntwaspresentin
someforminThomas'spoem.ButitispossiblethatTristan's
reputationpre-dateseventhis.ThereferencestoTristan's
huntingskillintextsoftheotherbranchmayshowtheresidual
influenceofatextpre-datingThomas.Further,Thomas's
compositioncannotbedatedwithanycertainty,andthe
appearanceofTristan'sreputationinCligÈssuggeststhathis
huntingwasalreadyawell-establishedcharacteristicbythetime
ChrÈtienwaswriting.EitherThomas'spoemmusthavebeen
sufficientlywell-knowninChampagneimmediatelyafterits
compositionforChrÈtientorefertoitwithconfidenceinhis
audience'sfamiliaritywithitor,whichismorelikely,
Tristan'sreputationmusthavebeenestablishedbeforeThomas's
poem.

ThechangewhichTristaneffectsthroughhislessonisto
transformtheCornishmen'sutilitarianbutcheryintocourtly
hunting.Yetalthoughhorrifiedbytheirbarbaricapproachto
breakingthegame,Tristandoesnotexplainwhyitisso
importanttobreakthebeastcorrectly.Itisobviousfromthe
intricacyoftheprocedurethatitisnotonlytofacilitatethe
carriageofthevenisonbacktocourt.Thereisareligious
meticulousnessintheprecisionwithwhichTristanbreaksthe
N050:005213270010
ÄAlthoughsomeincidentsintheplotappeartohavebeendrawn
fromearlyIrishandWelshtales,thefigureofTristan
himselfdoesnotappearinthese.Itwouldseeminappropriate
thereforetoattributeanyimportancetotheCeltictradition
notedbyGertrudeSchoepperleandRachelBromwichofahero
proficientinhunting.Onthispoint,seeSchoepperle,II,
p.396;RachelBromwich,"SomeRemarksontheCelticsourcesof
'Tristan'",ÑTransactionsoftheHonourableSocietyof
CymmrodorianÄ(1953),32-60(pp.32,45).

N051:003813300006
ÄSeeF.Remigereau,"Tristan"MaÓtredeVÈnerie"dansla
traditionanglaiseetdansleromandeThomas",ÑRomaniaÄ58
(1932),218-37,basedonthereconstructionofThomas'spoem
byJosephBÈdier,ÑLeRomandeTristanparThomasÄ,SATF,2
vols(Paris,1902-5).

E
Ädeer,asthereisintheprecisionoftheaccountsofthehunting
manuals.Butthereisadeepersignificancetothecourtly
proceduredescribedbybothTristanandthemanuals.thisis
revealedintheactionsoftheanimalsintheverseromanceSir
Tristrem.AlthoughnewtotheEnglishhunters,Tristrem's
techniqueselicitthecorrectresponsefromthehuntinghounds
andfromtheraven-

ﬁerauenhe#auehis#iftes,
Saton˛efourchedtre.(lines502-3)

Theimplicationisthatthisprocedureis"correct"inmorethan
justacourtlycontext;theritualisrecognisedbythenatural
worldasappropriateand"natural".Throughtheundoing,the
transitionbetweenthetwostatesofrespectedandreveredgame
andcarcassforthetableiseffectedformally.Atthesametime
thehunterisexoneratedfromtheblameheincursthroughkilling
thebeastand"makeshispeace"withnature.ê03,52ÄThedeermust
besystematicallydestroyedandbrokendownintopartswhichare
inthemselvesseparateandnewentities;itisritually"undone"
andreconstructed.ê19,53ÄGottfried'sTristaninsiststhattheportions
becarriedintocourtinanorder"preservingtheshapeofa
hart",(p.83)becauseitisadeeplyfeltneedtodistinguish
betweenthetwostates.

WhyTristaninparticularshouldhavehadattributedtohimgreat
skillinhuntingisnotimmediatelyclear.Severalfactors
combinetomakehuntingparticularlyappropriatetoTristan's
story.Themostimportantisthatthehuntingpracticeshe
demonstratesarethe"correct"andcourtlyproceduresandform
N052:004413750003
ÄGottfriedvonStrassburg,ÑTristanÄ,translatedbyA.T.Hatto,
PenguinClassics(Harmondsworth,1960),p.43.

N053:001813780019
ÄSomeinsightintothemeaningofthemedievalceremonymaybe
gainedfromanobservationofFrazer's:

Whenadeerwaskilled[bytheThompsonIndiansofBritish
Columbia],theysaidthattherestofthedeerwouldbewell
pleasedifthehuntersbutcheredtheanimalnicelyand
cleanly.

SirJ.G.Frazer,ÑTheGoldenBoughÄ,partV:SpiritsoftheCorn
andoftheWild,3rdedition,2vols(London,1912),II,p.242.

Othercustomsherecordsrelatingtothehuntingofdeer
hingeonthebeliefthatifthedeaddeerisnottreated
properlytheothers"wouldbesorryorangryandwouldspoil
[thehunter's]luckinthechase".Thewholeofthechapter
"ThePropitiationofWildAnimalsbyHunters",pp.204-73,
dealswiththisrelationshipbetweenthehunterandhisprey.


E
Äpartofalargercourtlymilieurelatedprimarilytoleisure
activity.Further,Tristan'sstoryisonewhichtakesplaceon
themarginsofchivalriclife:itisconcernedwiththepursuits
ofnobleleisure,ofwhichlove,huntingandmusic(anotherof
hisskills)areparamount.Theimportanceoftheseactivities,
whichareusuallyperipheraltothemainactionofchivalric
romance,isheightenedastheycometodominateTristan's
character.LoveisexploredinTristan'sstory,whereasinmost
romancesitisaspurtoactionbutisnotextensivelydeveloped
itself.Tristan'sinvolvementinloveandhuntingbothdefines
thecourtlysettinginwhichtheactiontakesplaceand
precipitatesmajoractionwithinthepoliticalandmilitary
sphereswhicharegenerallyconsideredmoreimportant.

ThestructuralroleofhuntinginTristan'slegendisalso
noteworthy.Thehuntingskilldemonstratedearlyinthestorybecomes
importantlaterwhenTristanhastoliveintheforest(insome
versions,byhuntingforfood).However,thisisnotsufficient
toexplaintheemphasisonTristan'sroleasahunter.Gottfried
inparticularisconcernedthathisabilityisnotconnectedwith
hissurvivalintheforest,stressingrepeatedlythatinthe
minnegrottethelovershuntonlyforpleasureastheydonotneed
toeat.Thatthefirstepisodeprefiguresalaterconcernwith
huntingissignificantinanotherway.Severalversionsofthe
legendinvolveincidentswithalatercounterpart,eachoneof
thepairedepisodesaffectingourinterpretationoftheother.
Forexample,insomeversionsTristan'sstepmothertriesto
poisonhimwithapotionwhichismistakenforwine,clearlya
distortedanalogueofthelove-potionmistakenforwinelater.
RecognitionofTristan'sswordisimportantattwoturningpoints
inthenarrative,andTristanistwicewoundedbyapoisoned
spearandseeksIsolt'said.Someversionshaveanotherhunting
incident:Tristan,hidinginabushreadytomeetIsolt,is
almostdiscoveredwhenastagMarkishuntingshiesawayfromhis
hidingplace.ThisisreversedlaterwhenastagMarkhuntsleads
himtotheminnegrottewheretheloversliesleeping,andthis
timeitisMarkwhoshiesaway.Inbothincidentsthestag
apparentlydoesTristanagoodturn,perhapsbecauseheaffords
thegameduerespectandgivesititsrightfulplaceinanatural
scheme.Thesepairedepisodeshelptounifythestory,andatthe
sametimegivenewinsightsintothemeaningofthemotifs.The
secondtimeamotifisused,resonancesofthefirstcolourour
understandingofit,andwerecallthefirstmotifwithanew
angleonitsinterpretation.TherepeatedreferencestoTristan's
huntinggivethehuntcumulativemeaningandassociationswhich
areboundupwiththethematicconcernsofcorrectnessand
courtliness.

Thetwoprincipalhuntingincidents,theinstructionofthe
CornishmenandMark'sdiscoveryoftheminnegrotte,framethe
mainbodyofthelove-storyinthetextsoftheThomasbranchof
thelegend.Thetwocounterpointedepisodeshighlightachangein
Tristan'spositionfrommasterhuntsmantothepreyofcourtly
hunters-thecompanionofthedeerwhoistrackedbyMarktohis
Älair.(Insomeversionshishideawayismarkedwithabranchor
turfasthehuntingmanualsinstructthehuntertomarkthe
hart'srestingplace.)Thecourtlyartsofwhich
Tristanwasmasterarenowgone-hisloveisbeyondthebounds
toleratedbypolitesociety,andhehasbecomethevictimofthe
courtlyhunt.(InEilhart'spoem,hishuntingsinksfromits
courtlystatustotrappingandtheÑarcquinefautÄ.)The
correspondencebetweenhuntingandloveascourtlyrefinementsof
twobasichumanneedsisimportanttotheTristanlegend;the
sophisticatedhuntingwhichoncedistinguishedtheherofrom
natureeventuallysignalshisaffinitieswithit.InEilhart's
work,itbecomesbarbaric,inGottfried'spoem,lifeinthe
minnegrotteisidyllic,amagicalexistenceofetherealbeautyin
whichartandnaturemingletomakesomethingperfectand
harmoniouslikethehuntingproceduresTristanteachesthe
Cornishmen.ButwhereasTristancanteachthehuntershowto
breakthedeerthroughinitiationintothesecretuseof
language,hecannotinitiateMarkintothemysteriesoflove;
Markmayobservebutnotapproachtheidealintheminnegrotte.
ThepropercurÈe,andthedeeppassionofTristanandIsolt,are
thewayswhichare"right"onacosmicscaleandshowTristanin
harmonywithanidyllicvisionofnature.

TheforegoingdiscussionhascombinedfreelythevariousEuropean
redactionsoftheTristanlegend.InMiddleEnglish,Tristan's
storyisrelatedintheverseromanceSirTristremandin
Malory'sÑBookofSirTristramdeLyonesÄ.InMalory'streatment,
Tristan'sskillisamatterofreputationratherthanactively
demonstrated.MaloryfrequentlymentionsTristram'slikingfor
thehunt,andatthebeginningoftheÑBookofSirTristramÄhe
establishestheprecisenatureofTristram'sreputation,saying
thatheinventedhuntinglanguageandmusic:

[Trystram]labouredinhuntyngeandinhawkynge-neverjantylman
morethateverweherderedeof.Andasthebookeseyth,he
begangoodmesuresofblowyngeofbeestesofveneryandbeestes
ofchaaceandallmanerofvermaynes,andallthetearmyswehave
yetofhawkyngeandhuntynge.Andthereforethebookeof[venery,
ofhawkyngeandhuntyngeiscalledthebookeof]sirTrystrams.
(I,p.375,lines16-22)

Theseskillsarepreciselythosewhichfeatureprominentlyin
theEnglishhuntingmanuals.Malory'sreferencetothe"bookeof
[venery,ofhawkyngeandhuntynge...calledthebooke]ofsir
Trystrams"firmlylinksthesubjectoftheEnglishhuntingbooks
andTristan'srole.Indeed,somecriticshaveassumedthatthere
wasahuntingmanualwiththattitleandeitherthatitistheÑ
BokeofHuntyngÄorthatithassincebeenlost.Theassociation
ofTristanwiththevocabularyofthehuntisborneoutintwo
earliertexts:inbothGottfried'sandBrotherRobert'spoems,
Tristan'slessontotheCornishhuntersincludesteachingthem
thecorrectterminology.Gottfriedplacesthemostemphasison
theterminologyandthehunters'unfamiliaritywithit,andtheir
interestinthenewhuntingtermsisparticularlystressed:
Ä
unlessyoushowme,Ishallnotknowthemeaningof"excoriate"!
Nobodyinthiskingdomknowsthetrickofit.Ihaveneverheard
itnamed,eitherbyusorbystrangers.Dearboy,whatis
"excoriate"?Goodasyouare,doshowitme.Comealong-
"excoriate"thishart!(pp.78-9)

Theyshowsimilarinterestintheotherterms,fourchie(diu
furkÓe)andquarry(diucuire),andinthecorrectmethodof
blowingthehuntinghorn.Tristanexplainstheetymologyofthe
termstothem.ê11,54ÄAsinthemanuals,educationintheartof
huntinginvolvesanunderstandingoftheterminology;itis
throughmasteringthelanguagethatanabilitytoperformthe
skillsisacquired.

ThepoetofÑSirTristremÄpaysnoattentiontothehunters'
interestintheterminologyofthehunt.Instead,heconcentrates
onTristrem'sdismayattheirtreatmentofthecarcases,their
willingnesstolearnthenewtechniquesandtheirdelightinthe
lesson.Tristanwatchesthemquartertheirgame-"Bestes˛ai
bracandbare,/Inquarters˛aihemwrou#t"(lines452-3)-and
expresseshisastonishment:

"Nesei#eyneuerare
Sowildebestywrou#t
Atwille.
O˛er",heseyd,"ycannou#t,
Orfolily#ehemspille."(lines458-462)

WhileforMalory,thelanguageofthehuntrepresentsitsspecial
courtliness,theTristrem-poetinveststhetechniquesofthe
undoingwiththissignificance.Butwhetheritisintheniceties
ofbutcheryoroflanguage,thequalityTristanbringstothe
huntiscourtliness.

MaloryusesTristram'sskilltoexplaineventsintheplot,
makinghisadventuresmoreplausible.WhenTristramencounters
someonewhilehunting,itismoreconvincingthanwhenaromance
herowithnospecialreasontobehuntinghasasimilar
encounter.Tristram'sdevotiontothesportgivesaplausible
reasonforhisabsencewhenIsoldeisabducted(I,p.442,lines
N054:001415060011
Ä"theycallthisthe'fourchie'inourhuntingusage,andthe
artissocalledfromitsbeingonthe'fourche',andthisis
mostappropriate,sincete'fourche'istheproperplacefor
it."(p.80)

"thisiswhattheycallthequarryathomeinParmenie,andI
willtellyouthereasonwhy.Thefoodonegivesthehounds
fromthehidetheycall'quarry'becauseitliesonthehide
of'cuire'.Thus'quarry'comesfrom'cuire'."(p.81)


E
Ä1-4);itgiveshimareasonforbeingintheforestwhenhemeets
PalomidesandagreestodobattlewithhimforIsolde(II,p.782,
32-5andp.783,lines1-2).However,thisbattleisnottotake
place.Justasthehuntallowedthechancemeetingwith
Palomides,soitstreacherousrelationshipwithfatedeprives
Tristramofhisbattle,forashepassesthetimebeforethe
conflicthuntingheiswoundedbythestrayarrowofanother
hunter(II,p.782,32-5andp.783,lines1-2).Tristram'sinjury
necessitatescancellingthefightwithPalomides.Thehunt
operatingasaninstrumentofchancethesecondtimeobliterates
theeffectithadthefirsttime,preventingthedevelopmentof
theadventureoriginallybegun.

Maloryputstheassociationofcourtlinesstostrikinguseinthe
episodeinwhichMarkfindsthemadTristramwhilehunting
himself.Againtheconventionallinkbetweenhuntingandachance
encounterisused,asMarkordainsahuntbecausehehopesto
findTristramduringitscourse,andhedoes(II,p.500,lines
31-5andp.501,lines1-5).Whenhefindshimlyingnakedbya
well,heblowshishornandcommandshisknightstotakeTristram
andcarryhimtothecastle.Tristram,oncethesupremecourly
hunter,isreducedtothestatusofananimalinthisscene.He
isdevoidofbothreasonandclothes,theinternalandexternal
distinguishingmarksofman,andissoughtandfoundwithinthe
contextofahunt.Mark'scourtlinessismanifestedinhis
hunting,andtheconfrontationbetweenthemadTristramandthe
courtlyhunterismadeallthemorepoignantbyourawareness
thatitwasTristramwhointroducedthearttoMark'scourt.Not
onlydoesMarkseekTristraminthecontextofahunt,buthe
blowshishuntinghornwhenhefindshisquarry-foramomentwe
mayalmostimaginehewillhuntTristram-andhisfallfrom
graceiscomplete.Thetransitionfromprincipalhuntertoprey
isthemostdrastictransformationpossibleforTristram,andthe
mostdisturbingforamedievalreaderwithahighlydeveloped
senseofman'splaceinthehierarchyofCreation.Thisepisode,
althoughdevelopedwithintheframeworkofaconventional
narrativemotif,isatoncedisturbingandironic;thenarrative
functionofthemotifisalmostnegligible;insteaditisthe
emotionalandimagisticreverberationswhicharethesourceof
itspower.ThisisconsistentlythecasewhenMaloryusesthe
conventionalhuntingmotifswithanydegreeoforiginality:the
primarynarrativefunctionisalwayssubordinatedtothe
symbolic,comicordefinitive,thelinearactionofthescene
madetoserveadifferentfunction,creatingmoodorfeeling,
commentingonordefiningcharacter.

Thehunter'spriorities:

InneitherincidentmentionedabovedoesTristramemergeas
particularlyheroic:hefailstosaveIsoldefromabduction,and
missesdoingbattleforher,bothonaccountofhisdevotionto
thehunt.Thisintroducestheflipsideoftheproficienthunter,
theaccusationsofcowardicewhichmayaccompanyparticularskill
inthesport.Thepossibilityofthisinterpretationofhis
Äskill,thesuggestionthatheeschewsadventureanddangeron
accountofit,isacknowledgedinMalory'stext,andarticulated
byIsolde:

"A!sehowsirTrystramhuntythandhawkyth,andcowrythwythina
castellwythhyslady,andforsakythus.Alas!"shallsomsey,
"hityspytÈthateverhewasknyghtoreverheshuldehavethe
loveofalady."(II,p.839,lines34-5andp.840,lines1-2)

ThisisverysimilartoEnide'scomplaintinÑEricetEnideÄ,and
isachargelevelledalsoatIpomadonandRoswallintheverse
romances.Here,thearticulationofIsolde'sfearhelpstodefuse
theaccusationbeforeitcanbemade,andtodenythatTristram
iscowardly.Insomeothertexts,theproblemisnotsolvedas
easily.

InthevariousversionsofÑIpomadonÄ,thesuggestionofcowardice
istackledhead-on.Ipomadon,hearingofthebeautyofthe
princessofCalabria,goestoserveinhercourt.Hemakeshis
markasabrillianthunter,andthecouplefallinlove.However,
theirloveisunacknowledged.Theprincessisunwillingtoadmit
herfeelingsbecausesheoncemadeaproudvowtomarrythe
greatestknightintheworldandIpomadon,thoughclearlya
paragonofcourtlybehaviour,showsnoproficiencyinbattle.His
skillinthehuntattractsherattentionandaffection,butitis
notaccompaniedbytheothertraditionalchivalrousskills.He
leaveshercourtandscornsherforseveralyearsashe
establishesachivalriclife.Later,heenterstheserviceofthe
kingofSicilywhereheisregardedasafoolbecauseofhis
devotiontothehunt.Heestablisheshimselfasaskilfulhunter,
demandstobeknownastheloverofthequeen,butshowsno
interestincombatorreallove.Throughouttheromancehe
retainsthispose,andfewcharactersseehistruevalue.He
eventuallywinsthehandoftheprincessbytakingpartsecretly
inatournamentdecreedtoforcehertoselectahusband.Hegoes
indisguisetofight,pretendingtothecourtthathegoes
huntingwheninfacthetakeshishoundstoahermitinthe
forestwhohuntsforhim;hisenthusiasticaccountsofhis
successinthehuntingfieldarethinlyveiledallegoriesofhis
conductinthelists,butheisridiculedmercilesslyforhis
lackofinterestinthecontest.

Alaterromance,ÑRoswallandLillianÄ,makesuseofthesame
motifs,withaherowhorejectsmilitaryendeavoursinfavourof
huntingandisscorned,andwhoeventuallywinsthehandofhis
belovedbyfightingindisguisewhilepretendingtohunt.
However,thesubstitutionofthehunterishandleddifferentlyin
thetworomances.ÑIpomadonÄdescribesindetailthehuntshe
pretendstohaveundertaken,whereasÑRoswallÄdoesnotdevelop
thematall.ThedetailsÑIpomadonÄgivesrepresentmetaphorically
thefighthehasengagedin,butdonotdescribetherealhunt
undertakenbythehermit.Themetaphorreducesthetournament,
associatingitwiththefollyofIpomadon'shunting,andsuggests
onhispartacasualanddetachedapproachtothebattlewhich
Ämagnifieshisprowess.Tothereader,thescenesindicatethat
forIpomadonthetournamentiseasy,asleisurelyashishunting,
whiletothecharactersintheromanceheappearsasincreasingly
foolish.ThispreparesforthereductionofIpomadon'senemies
andcolleagueswhenheisfinallyrevealedasthevictorious
knight.

Bothtalestacklethesubjectofhowhuntingcanbebotha
laudablecourtlyachievementandyetanindicationoffoolishness
andcowardice.Thetrueassessmentoftheactivityreliesupon
itsappropriatenessatanyonetime,andthepriorityitis
given.Ipomadonappearstotakehisloveofthehunttoan
extreme,refusingtogiveprecedencetomartialdutiesand
servinghisbeloved.Hisobsessiveindulgenceinaleisure
activityandhisapparentfailuretorecognisethecorrectorder
hisprioritiesshouldtakerightlybecomeasourceofmockery.
Roswallsimilarlyattractscensureforhisrefusaltorecognise
thepriorityofloveandwaroverhunting.But,atthecrucial
momentbothRoswallandIpomadonfightindisguisewhile
pretendingtohunt.Theheroisthusabletopreserveanairof
indifferenceandindependenceofpopularopinionandconvention.
Heretainshisindividualitymanifestedinthisidiosyncraticand
comicpreferenceuntiltheveryendoftheromancewhen,witha
flourish,heisrevealednotonlyasanon-conformistbutasa
supremelyefficientconventionalknight.Inthiswayheholdsour
interestwithoutultimatelydisappointingorfrustratingour
expectations.ForIpomadonthisisallpartofavengefulgame
andtheschemeofprioritieswhichplaceshuntingabovethe
tournamentheisexpectedtofightisneverseriouslyendorsed.
However,inRoswall'scaseitisslightlydifferent.Onthefirst
dayofthetournamentRoswallgoestotheforest,genuinely
intendingtohunt,butencountersthreeknightswhomhefreed
fromhisfather'sprison.Theknightsoffertohuntforhimso
thathecanenterthelistsindisguise.Roswallhasnowayof
knowingthattheknightswillcomeandhuntforhim;itispurely
bychancethathemeetsthemandsoisabletoenterthe
tournament.HisrefusaltofightforLillianandtoprovehis
loveandskilldonotrecommendtheherotous,anditisonly
throughthechanceappearanceofthethreeknightsthatheis
savedfromridiculeandestablishedasahero.Theromancecomes
dangerouslyclosetosacrificingthereader'sconcernforRoswall
asheinvitescondemnationwithoutofferingcomedy.

ThechastehuntercutsalessdramaticfigureinMiddleEnglish
literaturethanhedidasthetragicfigureofHippolytus.
Insteadofdefendinghischastityandhishuntingtothelast
againstsexualtemptation,hishuntinggiveswaytolove
whenthehunterbecomesmature.ThusDegrevant,depictedfirstas
aproficienthunter,fallsinlovewiththedaughteroftheearl
whodestroyshishuntingparks,andhisdesiretohuntleaves
him.WalterintheÑClerk'sTaleÄsimilarlyabandonshuntingwhen
hefallsinlovewithGriselda.Huntingandlove,althoughstill
portrayedasincompatible,arenolongermutuallyantogonistic,
butratherthehuntgiveswaytothemoreimportantbusinessof
Älovewhentheheroisreadyforsexualinvolvement.TheClassical
motifisadaptedbythemedievalauthorstoreflecttheirown
attitudestowardsthehunt.Insteadofdedicatedmilitaryprowess
andfiercelymasculinepride,themedievalchastehunteris
simplyimmature,andwhentherightwomanpresentsherselfhe
rightlyabandonshisstubbornrejectionofloveinfavourof
hunting.Thisformspartofthemuchlargerconcernwiththe
appropriatenessofhuntinganditscontext,itsplaceina
character'sprioritiesandthealternativeactivitiesavailable
atanytime:ifthealternativeistolove,toengageinwar,or
toundertakereligiousduties,huntingistoberejected,butif
thealternativeisidlenessorsin,huntingisthewiserchoice.

Parodiesoftheproficienthunter

Anauthorcouldeasilyshowthecourtlinessofacharacterby
referencetohuntingskill,andconsequentlyhuntingskillbecame
afeaturewhichreadilylentitselftoparody.WhenChaucer
createstheludicrousfigureofSirTopas,skillinhuntingis
oneofhismanyandvariedattributes:

Hekoudehunteatwildedeer,
Andrideanhaukyngforriver
Withgreygoshaukonhonde;
Thertohewasagoodarcheer;
Ofwrastlyngwasthernoonhispeer...(lines736-40)

However,hedoesnotquitemakethegradeasaheroridingoutin
searchofadventure,forheridesthroughtheforestwithout
hunting,passingbysuitablequarry:

Heprikeththurghafairforest,
Therinneismanyawildebest,
Ye,bothebukkeandhare.(lines754-6)

Huntingskillisonlyatinypartoftheparodicdepictionof
Topas,buttwopoems,theÑTaleofKingEdwardandtheShepherdÄ
andtheburlesqueÑHunttyngoftheHareÄ,havehuntingskillas
theircentralmotifs.Theanti-herooftheÑTaleofKingEdwardand
theShepherdÄisaproficientpoacherwhoboaststoacharacterhe
meetsontheroadofhisskillattakingrabbits.ê04,55ÄThe
characterturnsouttobetheking,andtherusticisduly
punishedforhispoaching.Thetalecondemnsboastingratherthan
poaching.Someoftheconventionalcharacteristicsofthemotif
oftheproficienthunterarereversedtoincreasethecomic
effect:thecourtlyhunterisreplacedbyarusticpoacherand
thenoblequarryisreplacedbytheignominiousrabbits.However,
theridiculetowhichIpomadonandRoswallaresubjectedis
N055:004917390004
ÄÑATaleofKingEdwardandtheShepherdÄinÑACriticalEdition
ofCambridgeUniversityMSFF.5.48Ä,editedbyJ.Y.Downing,PhD
dissertation,UniversityofWashington,1969.

E
Äsharedtoobytheshepherd,whoisportrayedasfoolish
throughout.

Thefifteenth-centurypoemtheÑHunttyngoftheHareê07,56Äisa
mock-heroicaccountofabattle;awholevillageandahundred
viciousdogsfailtocatchasinglehare,andreceivevarious
injuriesintheprocess.Ithaslittletorecommendittothe
modernreader,beingtoolonganddiffusetosustainitslimited
comicappeal.Themock-heroicaspectisdissipatedbyan
excessiveemphasisonnamingallthecharacters;probablythe
nameswereknowntotheintendedaudienceandthecomedyofthe
piecelayinthemockeryoffriendsandneighbours.Thehunt
itselfismerelyavehicleforachronicleofthevillagers'
incompetence,althoughthetriumphofthehareexploitsa
sympatheticattitudetowardstheprey.Thiskindof'sillychase'
isnotreallyahuntingmotif,butisperhapsbettergroupedwith
otherpursuits,suchasthechaoticchaseforthefoxattheend
oftheÑNun'sPriest'sTaleÄ.

Courtlyassociationsofthehuntinsecularandreligious
contexts

Wehaveseeenthatthehuntmaybedevelopedatsomelengthor
usedrepeatedlytogiveaspecialstatustoacharacter,oreven
toriudiculehim,butitmayalsobeusedonlyfleetinglyto
bestowcourtlystatusonacharacterorsociety.Itisthenstill
bebeingusedtohelpdefinecharacter,butinamuchmore
generalway.Innarrativeusesofthehunt,thefactthata
characterishuntingwhennotdoinganythingelsemarkshimasa
suitablecourtlyherofortheforthcomingadventure.But
sometimes,insteadofintroducinganadventure,thehuntisused
onlytobringthesecourtlyassociationstoacharacter,ortoa
society.Thereissomeoverlapbetweenthesecularandreligious
motifsinthisarea,astheuseofthehunt'sassociationwith
worldlypleasuresisawidely-usedmotifinreligiouscontexts.
Theexamplesdiscussedbelowuseonlythesecularaspectsofthe
hunt'sassociations,butthenextchapterconsidersalsosome
episodesfromverseromancewhich,thoughthemselvesinasecular
context,aremorecloselyrelatedtothereligiousmotif.


Theassociationofhuntingwithcourtlyandnobleleisureappears
inmanyguises.Inreligiouscontexts,theostentatiousnessof
theactivityisoftentakenasanemblemofasinful
preoccupationwithworldlyvanities,particularlyifinterestin
N056:005117500007
ÄCambridge,UniversityLibraryMSFf.5.48inÑAncientMetrical
TalesÄ,editedbyC.H.Hartshorne(London,1829);Cardiff,
NationalLibraryofWales,MSPorkington10inÑSecularLyrics
oftheXIVthandXVthCenturiesÄ,editedbyRossellHope
Robbins,2ndedition(Oxford,1955),pp.107-110.(Hereafter
SL.)

E
Äthehuntisseenasreplacingdevotionorreligiousduties.In
secularworks,themostfrequentreasonforappropriatingthe
spectacleofthecourtlyhuntistoenobleafigure,showinghim
ascourtly,noble,elegant,sophisticatedandcivilised.Little
narrativedevelopmentisgenerallygiventohuntingmotifsof
thistype.Instead,thebriefestevocationofthehuntistaken
tosuggestthewholerealmofcourtlyactivityandbehaviour
availableornaturaltothehero.


Huntingwasacknowledgedasaproperactivityforgentlefolkboth
infictionalandnon-fictionaltexts.ThecourtesybookÑLytel
JohnÄstatesplainlythatthisisthecase:

Imyghthauesaidhesholdgohauke&honte
Forthatsholdbeagentilmansgametosuchdisportesgentil
folkesbewonte.ê03,57Ä

Intheverseandproseromances,thisisexpressedintheuseof
huntingasaleisureactivitybylaudablecharacters.Often
appearingasatime-fillingactivityforaheroabouttoembark
onanadventure,thehuntunderlinesthenobilityofthe
characterwhoengagesinitatappropriatemoments.Inthisrole,
itisoftenpairedwithhawking.Insteadofthehuntbeing
interrupted,asinthe"unfortunatehunt"and"meetingwhile
hunting"motifs,thehuntthenfillsafixedspaceoftime,the
necessaryintervalbeforeapre-arrangedevent.ThusSirTriamour
andArduspassthetimeinhuntingandhawkingafterTriamour
arrivesandbeforethedayappointedforTriamour'sbattle.ê02,58Ä
InÑYwainandGawainÄ,thetimeafterYwain'smarriageandbefore
hisdepartureisspenthuntingandhawking.ê03,59ÄInÑTheSiegeof
JerusalemÄ,Vespasianandhiscompanionspassthetimehuntingand
hawkingwhiletheRomantroopstrytostarvetheJewsoutof
theircity.ê04,60ÄInthelatter,huntingmarkstheRomantroopsas
admirablecivilisedChristiansinthesamemouldasmedieval
noblemen.Thedisparitywhichwemightfeeltoexistbetweenthe
"civilised"activityofhuntingandthebarbarousactofstarving
theJewswhilethemselveshavingagoodtimewouldnothave
disturbedamedievalreader,thoroughlyconvincedoftheevil
natureoftheJews.Instead,thecourtlyhunthelpstounderline
N057:001618080003
ÄÑLytelJohnÄinÑCaxton'sBookofCurtesyeÄ,editedby
F.J.Furnivall,EETS(London,1868),p.47,lines464-6.

N058:005918200002
ÄÑTriamourÄ,lines

N059:004318220003
ÄÑYwainandGawainÄ,editedbyA.B.Friedman&N.J.Harrington,
EETS254(London,1964),lines1443-4.

N060:001118250004
ÄÑSiegeofJerusalemÄ,lines885-9.



E
ÄthedifferencebetweentheChristiansandtheirnon-courtly
enemiesandhelpstointegratetheRomanex-paganVespasianinto
theworldofthemedievalcourtlyromance.

Butsuchleisuremustbeappropriateifitistoescape
condemnation.Thehuntmustberecognisedascourtly,assport
ratherthanasautilitarianoccupation,butitmustalsobe
fittedatanappropriateplaceintoaschemeofprioritiesor
values.Thismaybeusedtothehero'sadvantage,asinÑGuyof
WarwickÄwhenGuyrefusesanearl'sofferofhuntinggearand
leisureinfavourofleavingtoseektoestablishhisprowessand
hisworthinessasahusbandforFelice.Theoppositeeffectis
achievedinÑPartonopeofBloisÄwhenPartonopespendshisyear
withMeliorhuntingduringthedaysandmakingloveduringthe
nights.Althoughforalongtimeheishappy,itisimpliedthat
somuchleisureisunproductive.LikeChrÈtien'sErec,hecan
onlystagnate,neverprosper,inthissterileandeasilyattained
blissandheisforcedeventuallytoloseituntilhehasearned
it.ThesuggestionisthatPartonopedoesnotlearnorachieve
anythingduringthisyear.Whenheiseventuallybanishedfrom
Melior'skingdomheisthrownoutinthehuntinggearinwhichhe
arrived,theimplicationbeingthathehasmadenoprogressand
isstillatthebeginningoftheadventure.

Thecourtlyassociationsofthehuntmaybeextendedtodepicta
lifestyle.WhenAmisandAmilounareadoptedandarefree"to
rideanhuntingvnderriis"(line136),thehunt,redolentof
courtliness,isemblematicofthecourtlinessoftheirnewlife
andthecharacteroftheiradoptivehousehold.TwiceMaloryuses
thehunttosignifythenormalcourtlylifefromwhichinsane
charactersareexcluded.InthecaseofTristramithighlights
thechangeinhisstate,butforLancelotengagementinthehunt
marksthebeginningsofreintegrationintocourtlysociety.A
contrastbetweencourtlylifeandthoughtsofdeathisfound
frequentlyinareligiouscontext,butevenintheverseromances
thehuntsometimesemergesinthisrole.WhenthekingdiesinÑLe
BoneFlorenceofRomeÄhiscourtiersmournhisdeathwithlaments
forhisgenerosityingivingthemhuntinggearandothercourtly
accoutrements,signifyinghiscourtlynatureaswellas
munificence.ê02,61ÄThekingoftheÑSquireofLowDegreeÄtriesto
bringhisdaughterbacktoanappropriatecourtlylifestyleafter
thesupposeddeathofherloverbyofferingherthechanceto
hunt,buthuntingandmourningareincompatible,asweshallsee
later,andheisunsuccessfulinhisattempttomakeherforget
herlover.ê02,62Ä

Conclusion

N061:001218710002
ÄÑTheBoneFlorenceofRomeÄ,editedby

N062:001018760002
ÄÑTheSquireofLowDegreeÄ

E
ÄWehaveseeninthischapterthattheusestowhichhunting
motifsareputbytheauthorsofMiddleEnglishtextscanbe
dividedapproximatelyintonarrative,character-definingand
associativefunctions.Themostprevalentmotifsarethosewhich
evokethehuntonlybrieflyanduseittointroduceanadventure
ornewdepartureinthenarrative.Thehuntisinthiscaseoften
interruptedandleftbehindassoonasnewconcernspresent
themselves.Occasionally,huntswhichintroduceanewadventure
areboar-hunts.Inthiscase,theyserveanadditionalfunction,
thatofestablishingtheprowessandbraveryofthehunter.The
boar-huntusuallystraddlesthecategoriesofnarrativeand
character-definingmotifs,thoughsometimesitisusedonlyto
definecharacter.Suchhuntsareusuallytreatedatlengthandin
detail,asthehunter'sgoodcharacteremergesfromtheskilland
couragewhichheexhibitsinthehunt.Alternatively,proficiency
inthehuntmaybeadistinguishingcharactersticofaromance
hero:TristanandIpomadonarethemostfullydevelopedexamples.
Inthesecases,whereamorecompleteanalysisoftheroleofthe
huntisrequired,considerabledetailisoftenincludedinthe
author'streatmentofthechase.Theemphasisonthehunt'slinks
withadventureissubstantiallyreduced.NeitherIpomadon'snor
Tristan'sstoryismuchconcernedwiththerandomeventswhich
contributetoadventureandareelsewhereassociatedwiththe
vulnerabilityofthehunter.Thehuntisinsteadconnectedwith
courtlinessand,particularlyinIpomadon'scase,withthe
foolishnessofaschemeofprioritieswhichovervalueshunting.
Thehuntingcharacterinliteratureisexpectedtoabandonthe
huntwheneveramoreimportantconcernisencountered-itmaybe
theopportunityforlove,ormartialexploits-andwhenhedoes
notacknowledgethecorrectplaceofthehuntheisridiculed.
Theanomalyofthecourtlyyetfoolishhunterandthemixed
feelingsheinspiresistreatedatlengthinÑIpomadonÄ;thefinal
deviceofthesubstitutehuntertakingoverwhiletheherofights
inatournamentallowsexpressionofhis
excellenceasbothahunterandwarriorsimultaneouslyand
demonstratesthattheyarenotmutuallyexclusive.
Ñ
IpomadonÄcontainsdetailedandaccuratedescriptionsofhunting
techniquewhichareanimportantpartofitsminuteandbeautiful
evocationofthecourtlysetting.Thepoemcelebratesand
displayscourtlylife,revellinginsuchdetailforthesakeof
itsintrinsicaestheticappeal.Thehuntscenessimilarly
contributetotheevocationofthemilieuinÑSirGawainandthe
GreenKnightÄand,thoughmoresophisticatedaspectsofthepoets'
useofthehuntdominatecriticalinterestinbothpoems,this
functioninÑSirGawainÄandÑIpomadonÄremainsimportant.Both
romancesuse(andindeedpromote)theassociationofthehunt
withcourtlinesswhichiselsewhereusedbrieflytoattribute
particularqualitiestocharactersorsocieties.Initsleast
sophisticatedform,thisinvolvesoccupyingsparetimewitha
hunttodemonstratethechivalricvirtueofacharacter,and
theseassociationsextendalsotothenarrativemotifs,building
upthehunterinoureyesbeforeheevenembarksuponan
adventure.Elsewhere,though,itmaybeusedmorethoughtfully,
ÄastheauthoroftheÑSiegeofJerusalemÄusesittoalignthe
earlyRomanswiththeidealsofmedievalchivalry,orasMalory
usesittosymbolisethenormalcourtlysocietyfromwhichinsane
charactersareexcludedandagainstwhichtheirdemeanedstate
maybecompared.Theusesofthehunt'sassociationswithnormal
courtlyactivityarethuswide-rangingandpervasiveinthe
seculartextswehaveexaminedhere.Nowweshallturntothe
huntingmotifswhichoccurinreligioustexts,anditwillbecome
obviousthattheseassociationscontinuetobeimportant.Indeed,
thedominantroleofthehuntinreligiouswritingsisto
identifythecourtly,secularwayoflifewhichitrepresentsin
theverseandproseromances.Theambiguousstatusofthehunter
whichwehaveseenparticularlyinthecharactersofIpomadonand
Roswall,andtheconcernwiththecorrectplaceofthehuntina
hunter'sschemeofprioritieswillemergeasdominantissuesin
religioustreatmentsofthehunt.

20747|31Dec1989
