!Access+
========

!Access+ allows you to share directories across an Acorn Access network with
a level of password protection. To use !Access+, you need a working Access+
network.

Drag and drop sharing
---------------------

When loaded, !Access+ installs an icon on the icon bar. To share a directory,
drag it from the directory display onto !Access+'s icon bar icon. This will
bring up a dialogue box in which you can enter the name by which you want the
directory to be shared under, and the password under which to share it. This
password can consist of up to six letters or numbers, and is not case
sensitive. You may leave the password field blank; this will share the
directory without a password.

To see the directory on other machines, go to the Logon dialogue box which
can be obtained from the icon bar menu of the "Discs" icon. (When you have
mounted remote discs on your machine, the "Discs" icon is "covered up" by the
remote drives - however, you can still obtain this menu by clicking Menu over
one of the remote disc icons.) Fill in the name under which you chose to
share the directory, and enter the password.

The !Access+ icon bar menu contains options which allow you to see details of
a share, to stop sharing a directory, or to save details of the currently
shared directories so that they will be shared automatically the next time
!Access+ is run.

Structured sharing
------------------

!Access+ also provides a method by which a predefined directory structure may
be shared automatically. Three directories in the same directory as the
!Access+ application are recognised; these should be called "Apps", which is
shared read-only, and which should contain applications to be shared across
the Access network, "Boot", which is shared in such a way as to make it
invisible on other machines, and which may contain shared resources such as
!System, and "Dirs".

The "Dirs" directory contains user directories which are shared separately.
To activate the entire structured sharing system, you must create a text file
containing a line for each user, of the form:

U Username password

Where the first letter is "U" to share the directory unprotected (ie all
files are visible) or "P" to share it protected (ie only files with public
access set are visible), the username is the name the user should use to log
on, and must be the same as the name of the user's directory inside the
"Dirs" directory, and the password is up to six letters or numbers as before.
Dropping this file onto the !Access+ icon bar icon will create and save these
shares.
