
ReadMe for Acorn RISC OS 3.70 and StrongARM Processor Upgrade
=============================================================

This ReadMe file provides extra information on the RISC OS 3.70 and
StrongARM upgrade, not covered in the printed documentation. This allows
us to provide the latest available information on troubleshooting, and
on compatibility of old applications.

Please read both the printed documentation and this ReadMe before
installing the upgrade. It is particularly important that you check
this ReadMe for any patches or fixes that need to be made to
existing software before you re-use it.

The items covered in this ReadMe are:

  1) CD ROM drives - patching !BootIDECD, if present

  2) Patches - a list of the application incompatibilities that can be
  readily fixed by applying patches supplied with the software upgrade.

  3) Compatibility - a list of applications and hardware expansions that
  are known to work, or not to work, with StrongARM, together with any
  details of possible upgrades.

  4) Troubleshooting - some suggestions if the upgrade gives problems.


1) CD ROM drives and !BootIDECD
-------------------------------

If you have a Cumana CD ROM drive for the IDE bus, then before replacing
the support application, !BootIDECD, in !Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk you
_must_ edit the run file (!BootIDECD.!Run) to prevent loading of the
module ADFSPatch. Change the line of the form:

  rmload <Obey$Dir>.ADFSPatch

to be:

  rmensure utilitymodule 3.60 rmload <Obey$Dir>.ADFSPatch

If you have a CD ROM drive, but do not have !BootIDECD, then you need
not take any action.


2) Patches
----------

Here is a list of the patches supplied with the RISC OS 3.7 upgrade.
These fix compatibility problems either with RISC OS 3.7 or with
the StrongARM processor. You can find the patches in the
Utilities.Patches directory after performing the upgrade.

In general, it is wise to make sure you have a backup of any items
before applying the patches.

PocketFS
To patch PocketFS 2.03 for RISC OS 3.7, run the !Patch application,
and drag your copy of !PocketFS onto the !Patch icon.

ansilib
A new version of ansilib for those with the Acorn C/C++ toolkit. See
the ReadMe file in Utilities.Patches.ansilib.

CallASWI
A support module for backward compatibility with older versions of
RISC OS. You do not need this item unless you are writing software
for release. See Utilities.Patches.CallASWI.ReadMe for details.

SCSIDM
A version of ScsiDM relinked to work with StrongARM. See the ReadMe
file in Utilities.Patches.SCSIDM

SparkFS
The new components required to patch !SparkFS 1.27 for use with
StrongARM. See the ReadMe file in Utilities.Patches.SparkFS.

SSound
A new version of the shared sound module, which works with StrongARM.
See the ReadMe file in Utilities.Patches.SSound.


3) Compatibility
----------------

Here is a list of applications and hardware that are known to work - or
not to work - with StrongARM and RISC OS 3.7, together with any details
of possible upgrades. More up to date information may be available on
the ART web pages ( see http://www.art.acorn.co.uk/ ).


Information from ANT
--------------------

Ethernet cards -  ANT cards that have been bought from Atomwide Ltd,
or Acorn badged ANT cards will require a ROM upgrade. This applies
to both 'NIC' and 'Podule' variants. Please refer to your dealer for
further information about upgrades to these cards.


Information from ART
--------------------

Acorn C/C++ - works on StrongARM. A new version of ansilib
for StrongARM is supplied in Utilities.Patches (remember, ansilib
is _not_ for production code).

TCP/IP Release 2 - works on StrongARM, after patching the protocol
modules. See Utilities.Patches.TCP/IP.

OmniClient - works on StrongARM. 

AUN Level 4 - works on StrongARM.

PocketFS - version 2.03 works on StrongARM, after patching with
Utilities.!Patch.

PCx86 - versions 1.91 or later have been tested and confirmed as
working. Upgrades are available free of charge from the Acorn FTP
site, or at low cost via dealers (as product code ACA54).

Advance - does not work on StrongARM

DTP - does not work on StrongARM

First Word Plus - does not work on StrongARM

Ethernet cards - cards that have been purchased from i-cubed Ltd
directly, or i-cubed cards that have been Acorn badged should work
correctly. ANT cards that have been bought from Atomwide Ltd, or
Acorn badged ANT cards will require a ROM upgrade. This applies to
both 'NIC' and 'Podule' variants. Please refer to your dealer for
further information about upgrades to these or the situation
regarding other manufacturers' cards.


Information from Apricote Studios
---------------------------------

Prophet 2 - works on StrongARM, and typically runs 5 times faster than
on an ARM710. In tests, it was able to load and parse a database
containing records for over 3600 customers in just under 3 seconds. 

Shares 5 - works on StrongARM, and typically runs 5 times faster than
on an ARM710. 

Personal Accounts 3 - works on StrongARM, and typically runs 5 times
faster than on an ARM710. 


Information from Aspex
----------------------

ArchiTech - works on StrongARM, and runs up to 5 times faster than on
an ARM710. 

Tabs+ - runs successfully on StrongARM. 

DaVinci 90 - runs successfully on StrongARM. 

Spex+ - Spex+ (and its associated environment libraries Spex Home, Spex
Street, Spex Moonbase, Spex Clasroom, Spex LeisurePool and Spex IT Room)
runs successfully on StrongARM. 

Some early versions of Aspex products use self-modifying code during their
initialisation sequence, so these versions will not work on StrongARM.
If any of the products listed above exhibit this failure mode, contact
Aspex for an upgrade. 


Information from Beebug
-----------------------

Sleuth 2 - The file "kidsbook" as supplied with Sleuth 2 takes 72 seconds
to convert on a Risc PC 700. It takes 20 seconds on StrongARM - at a
conversion rate of 1,944 words per minute. 

Ovation Pro - Picture runaround Dolphin image takes 9 seconds on a Risc
PC 700, reduced to less than 2 seconds on a StrongARM.

Sleuth, Masterfile 3, Hard Disc Companion, TypeStudio, Desktop Thesaurus,
PlayBack, ArcScan, Chartwell, DeskEdit and MenuBar have also been tested
with successful results. 


Information from Clares
-----------------------

ProArtisan 2 - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Topographer - works successfully on StrongARM, exhibiting a very significant
speed-up; it runs circa 10 times faster than on ARM710. 

NightSky - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Plot - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Schema 2 - works successfully on StrongARM, and recalculates significantly
more quickly than on ARM710. 

Celebration - works successfully on StrongARM. 

CardShop - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Knowledge Organiser - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Titler - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Sequencer - works successfully on StrongARM. 

RhythmBed - works successfully on StrongARM. 

ScoreDraw - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Render Bender - works successfully on StrongARM, and renders significantly
more quickly than on ARM710. 

Illusionist - works successfully on StrongARM. 

AlphaBase - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Armadeus - works successfully on StrongARM. 

Composition - Composition 1.02 does not work on StrongARM; however, changes
have been made which will enable a new release, provisionally 1.03, to work.
Upgrade details will be made available by Clares. 

Serenade - Serenade 1.10 does not work on StrongARM; however, changes have
been made which will enable a new release, provisionally 1.11, to work.
Upgrade details will be made available by Clares. 

Virtualise - Virtualise 1.06 does not work on StrongARM; however, changes
have been made which will enable a new release, provisionally 1.07, to work.
Upgrade details will be made available by Clares. 


Information from Dalriada
-------------------------

TableMate - All tested versions of TableMate work successfully on StrongARM.
Versions tested are 1.10, 1.10i (as bundled with Computer Concepts' Impression
Style), 2.00m (representative of any 2.xx version) and 3.20a (representative
of any 3.xx version). 

TableMate Designer - The forthcoming TableMate Designer (currently in beta,
release scheduled for Acorn World '96) works successfully on StrongARM. 

DiagramIt - v. 1.10f works successfully on StrongARM. 

GraphMate - v. 1.10c works successfully on StrongARM. 

ReTreeval - v. 1.00a and 1.10c work successfully on StrongARM. 


Information from Desktop Projects
---------------------------------

QuickTile - v. 1.03 works successfully on StrongARM. 

QuickLynk - v. 1.04 works successfully on StrongARM. 

QuickSound - v. 1.00 works successfully on StrongARM. 

QuickShow - v. 1.00 works successfully on StrongARM. 


Information from Gnome
----------------------

!X - The !X X server runs approximately twice as fast as
on a Risc PC 700. 


Information from Irlam Instruments
----------------------------------

RiscTV - The RiscTV card works successfully on StrongARM. 

VideoDesk - The VideoDesk card works successfully on StrongARM. 

24i16 - The 24i16 digitiser card works successfully on StrongARM. 

ReplayDIY - The ReplayDIY software works successfully on StrongARM. 


Information from Intelligent Interfaces
---------------------------------------

Dual High Speed Serial Interface Expansion Card - Using the current
version of the IIDual module (V3.72) the Dual High Speed Serial
Interface works with a StrongARM 

IEEE488 Interface Expansion Card - Using the current version of the
IEEE488 module (V1.04) the IEEE488 Interface works with a StrongARM 

16 Bit Parallel I/O Interface Expansion Card - Using a new version of
the 16BitPIO module (V1.03) the 16 Bit Parallel I/O Interface works
with a StrongARM 

STEbus Interface Expansion Card - Using the current version of the
STEbus module (V1.10) the STEbus Interface works with a StrongARM 

Desktop Fortran 77 - All the components of Desktop Fortran 77 (The
compiler, the linker and the !Fortran77 application) work with a
StrongARM. 


Information from David Pilling
------------------------------

Chess II, Trace, d2font, Snap and Spark have been tested and are known
to work (Chess II and Trace both exhibit an impressive increase in
speed).

SparkFS requires a small patch to be implemented, and the patch
kit is available in Utilities.Patches.SparkFS.


Information from Spacetech
--------------------------

Photodesk - runs successfully on StrongARM, at a speed significantly higher
than on a Risc PC 700 (up to a factor of 10 times faster). 


Information from TBA Software
-----------------------------

'TAG' engine - has been tested on the StrongARM and found to be compatible
and significantly faster. 



4) Troubleshooting
------------------

In case you do encounter problems after performing the upgrade, here
is a list of symptoms, with probable reasons and remedies.


** The machine does not show any signs of life

   Reasons                                 Remedies

   * RISC OS 3.7 ROMS have not been        Switch off and fit RISC OS 3.7
     fitted yet                            ROMS

   * Either or both RISC OS 3.7 ROMs       Check for bent or broken pins and/or 
     have been fitted the wrong way        that they are fitted correctly as       
     round, not pushed in firmly, have     described            
     broken or bent pins  
                                           
   * Machine trying to boot from another   Make sure that the machine boots 
     device other than the internal IDE    from the internal IDE hard drive
     Hard Disc drive
   
   * Two ARM processors are fitted         Check that there is only one fitted 
                                           to PROC I/F (Slot 0)
           
   * An incompatible expansion card or     Remove all expansion cards and  
     network card is fitted                re-install one at a time to identify
                                           incompatible card(s).
           
   * StrongARM/RISC OS 3.7 ROMs are        Contact your Dealer or
     faulty                                Centre of technology
           
   * RAM SIMM(s) not fitted/faulty         Fit RAM SIMM(s)/contact supplier 
                                           of RAM
                                        
** The machine starts but does not reach the desktop

   * Disc installation has not been        Refit old processor and OS and 
     performed                             restart the disk installation


** The machine reaches the desktop but crashes when trying to catalogue a disc

   * There is a visible incompatible       Restart the machine in Supervisor  
     application on the disc               mode and remove the offending 
                                           application

   * There is an old copy of the module    Restart the machine whilst holding 
     SharedSound (SSound) resident in      down the SHIFT key and replace any  
     !System or elsewhere.                 copies of the old SharedSound with 
                                           the new one supplied as part of the 
                                           StrongARM software upgrade


** The software I want to use does not work

                                           Check the Utilities.Patches directory
                                           supplied in the new disc installation;
                                           there may be a patch for your software.

                                           Contact the software developer for an
                                           upgrade or patch.

                                           Try turning the cache off (press f12 
                                           and type *cache off), though the
                                           performance is likely to be poor.

                                           Switch off, try refitting the old  
                                           processor card and rebooting your 
                                           machine. (Remember the processor cards
                                           are static sensitive.)
                                           
                                           The ARM Club are planning to release a 
                                           new software package which will enable 
                                           some software to run on a StrongARM 
                                           which would otherwise be incompatible.
                                           This should be available in November from:
                                           
                                           The ARM Club, FREEPOST ND6573, London, 
                                           N12 0BR

                                  
** No networking facility available after installing the upgrade.

   * Network card/software not             Configure networking card/software 
     configured                            as described

   * StrongARM incompatible network        Contact developer of network card  
     card present.                         for possible upgrade
