
ReadMe for RISC OS 3.70 ROM Patches, 24-Oct-96
----------------------------------------------

Since release of the StrongARM upgrade and RISC OS 3.70, two minor
problems have been identified, and these are readily fixed with
the supplied simple patch utility.

Please read the following sections fully before using the patch.


Purpose of patches
------------------

The first problem occurs with the parallel port, when connected to
some Hewlett Packard printers. The symptom is that printing to file
is fine, but printing to the printer is extremely slow, or never
completes. With the patch, a wider range of Hewlett Packard printers
is supported.

The second problem can cause occasional errors with some
applications. This only affects RISC OS 3.70 when running on
StrongARM (SA110, revision less than 3). A typical symptom is an
occasional error including the message "No stack for trap handler".
However, remember that this rare problem is entirely unrelated to
errors caused by application incompatibility with RISC OS 3.70 or
with StrongARM.

For developers, there is technical information on the second problem,
and how it may affect their code, in the accompanying file, TechNote.
(Users can ignore TechNote.)


Installing the patches
----------------------

The patches are easily installed by copying the supplied Obey file
!!ROMPatch and the supplied directory (with contents) ROMPatch
into your

 !Boot.Choices.Boot.PreDesk

directory. To do this, open !Boot by holding down the Shift key
while double-clicking on !Boot. Next, double-click to open Choices,
then Boot, then Predesk. Now drag !!ROMPatch and ROMPatch into
Predesk.

Finally, restart your machine to activate the patches. You will
notice a new dynamic area 'ROM patches 3.70/1' in the task bar
display, if you click on the Acorn iconbar icon.


Distribution
------------

These patches may be freely distributed to others for use with RISC
OS 3.70, provided they are distributed unaltered and complete. The
complete distribution comprises:

  !!ROMPatch
  ReadMe      (this ReadMe file)
  ROMPatch    (and contents)
  TechNote

These patches must not be used with any other version of RISC OS.

