+--------------+
|   MineHunt   |
+--------------+

Author: Paul LeBeau (c) 1992/93/94.
Email:  paul_lebeau@equinox.gen.nz
Snail:  c/o 4Mation
        14 Castle Park Road
        Barnstaple
        Devon
        EX32 8PA
        Tel: +44 271 25353
        Fax: +44 271 22974

This game is freeware.
The author retains copyright.
No charging other than media and distribution costs etc.
Please contact author if in doubt.

If you enjoy this game and wish to thank me for it, then
please make a donation to your favourite charity.

Dedicated to Judith Matson who gave me the idea to do the
conversion, and the author(s) of the original game that
this version is based on.

----------------------------------------------------------


How to play
-----------

The playing area is a rectangular grid of covered squares. Hidden in the
grid is a specified number of mines.  The object of the game is to locate
all the mines as quickly as possible.  You have to mark all the squares
where you think there are mines and uncover all the other squares.  If you
manage this, then you have won, but if you uncover a mine, you lose!  The
score is just the number of seconds you have taken to complete the game.  So
the faster you complete the game, the better your score.  The timer starts
when you uncover the first square.

At the start of the game, you have no idea where the mines are, so the first
few squares you uncover will have to be guesses.  One strategy is to uncover
the corner squares first.

* To 'uncover' a square, point at it and click SELECT.

If the square you have uncovered contains a mine, the the game is over. 
Mine Hunt will then show you the locations of all the mines.  The mine with
a red background is the one you just uncovered, and the mines with green
backgrounds are the mines you correctly marked.  All the other mines are the
ones you hadn't found yet.

* To start a new game, select 'New game' from the main menu, or click on the
  'man' at the top of the board.

If the square you just uncovered did not contain a mine, then Mine Hunt will
display in that square a number which indicates how many of the adjacent
squares contain mines.

So, if you turn over a corner square and it shows the number '1', then you
know that one of the surrounding three squares contains a mine.  If you turn
over a square near the centre of the board and it shows the number '3' then
you know that three of the surrounding eight squares contain mines.

If the square is blank, then none of the surrounding squares contain mines. 
If this occurs, Mine Hunt will help you by uncovering all the surrounding
squares for you.  If any of those are blank, then all their neighbours will
be uncovered, and so on (giving a 'cascading' effect).

Hopefully, after a few guesses to start with, you will have enough
information to start deducing where the mines are.


Marking squares
---------------

If you are pretty sure that an uncovered square contains a mine, then you
should mark that square.

* To mark a square you think contains a mine, click ADJUST over the square.

The square will then be marked with a little red flag.  Each time you mark a
square, the mine/flag counter in the top left of the window reduces by one. 
Note: this happens even if you incorrectly mark a square which doesn't
actually contain a mine!

For 'safety' purposes, squares marked with a flag cannot be uncovered.  This
is to protect against accidentally uncovering marked mines.  It is possible,
however, to turn off the flag so you can uncover the square (see later for
how to do this).


Question marks
--------------

You can mark an uncovered square with a question mark if you want.  You
might want to use this to mark squares you think might contain mines etc.,
while you are in the midst of the deducing process.

* To mark a square with a question mark, point at it and click ADJUST twice.

Later, you can change the question mark to a flag, or uncover it.

Note: squares with question marks are not 'protected' and can still be
      uncovered by clicking with SELECT.


Clearing flags and question marks
---------------------------------

* To clear a flag from a square, point at it and click ADJUST twice.

When you remove a flag, the mine/flag counter increases by one as expected.

* To clear a question mark from a square, point at it and click ADJUST once.

Ie. clicking with ADJUST cycles through the sequence:


     clear  -->  flag  -->  question mark  -+
      /|\                   (if turned on)  |
       |                                    |
       +------  <-------  <-------  <-------+

If you never use the question mark facility, then you can disable them
(for speed and convenience) by turning off the 'Question marks' entry in
the main game menu.


'Clearing around'
-----------------

To save time, Mine Hunt as a special feature where if a numbered uncovered
square has the correct number of neighbouring squares marked as mines, you
can quickly uncover the other neighbours.

* To 'clear-around' a square, point at it and click SELECT whilst holding
  down the SHIFT key.

Clearing around has exactly the same effect as if you had clicked on all the
other uncovered neighbours individually.

If any of the neighbours are incorrectly marked, then clearing around will
cause you to uncover a mine and the game will be over!  So be careful!


Difficulty levels
-----------------

There are five predefined levels to play at, plus a Custom level facility.

The five normal levels are summarised below.

Name           Board size   Mines   % mines
-------------  -----------  ------  --------
Beginner       8  by 8      10      15.6 %
Better         16 by 8      20      15.6 %
Intermediate   16 by 16     40      15.6 %
Good           24 by 16     60      15.6 %
Expert         30 by 16     99      20.6 %

You cannot select any levels which use a board that is too large for the
current screen mode.  Those levels will be greyed out in the menu.

There is also a custom level where you can set your own board size and
number of mines.  You can set up a custom level by going into the
'Level->Custom->' dialogue box.

You can set the width and height and number of mines by clicking on the
arrows.  The maximum size of the game area is 64 by 64, but Mine Hunt will
not let you go any bigger than the current screen mode will allow.

If you click on the 'Auto mines' button, Mine Hunt will choose a suitable
number of mines for you.  The number of mines Mine Hunt chooses for you
depends on the size of the game area you have set.

Click on the 'OK' button to play this level.


Other information and facilities
--------------------------------

* If you record a top-5 time for the current level, you will be asked to
  enter your name for the high-score table.  To show the high-scores, click
  on 'High scores->Show'.  To reset/clear the high score table click on
  'High scores->Reset'.

* The colours of the mine counter and score numerals can be changed by
  clicking on the digits.  The colour cycles with each click and can be
  set to one of: green, light grey, blue, orange.

