
prpalgen Release Notes - version 0.0beta
----------------------------------------

Introduction
------------

prpalgen is an editor for the new (version 2) printer palette format. It is a
minimal, command-line based utility, intended only for technically aware
users. It allows colour printing to be tuned over a wide range of parameters
for a particular printer (and perhaps particular inks and paper).

prpalgen constructs tables for the PDumperSpt module. This means that it is
only relevant to colour bitmap (non-PostScript) printers. It only deals with
the 16 million colour printing mode, which is now typically capable of much
higher print quality. The other colour modes (256 colour and 32 thousand colour)
are not recommended, unless memory limits prevent 16m colour printing.


Technical background
--------------------

The new release of !Printers provides much enhanced colour bitmap printing
capability in the 16 million colour printing mode, when compared with release
1.28c. This is mainly the result of a new 16 million colour engine in the
PDumperSpt module.

The transformation from RGB space (in which the application renders for
the printer driver) and CMY or CMYK space (to which the printer driver
maps for the printer) is controllable over a wide range of parameters.
This means that the driver can typically be set up to provide much higher
quality results with a particular printer/ink/paper combination.

The RGB->CMY(K) transformation is defined by tables which form part of the new
printer palette format. prpalgen can read a text file containing parameters
and update the tables in the palette file. It can also read the palette
file and output the text file of parameters.

Note that the format of the tables in the palette file is private to the
printing system; the tables may be enhanced, moved or hidden in a future
release. However, the parameters of the tables are defined here, and will be
portable to a future release.

Despite the enhanced transformation, the new 16 million colour driver
can typically render a page substantially faster than the old driver, or the
new driver in another colour mode. This allows substantially quicker return of
control when printing to a fast device (eg. hard disc file), or when an
application cooperates with the !Printers queueing protocol.

Printing modes other than 16 million colours still behave essentially as
in previous releases. In particular, the 256 colour and 32 thousand colour
modes do NOT use the new RGB->CMY(K) transformation and do NOT inherit the
speed improvements. The combination of reduced quality and speed means that
the 256 colour and 32 thousand colour modes are not recommended to the
user except in cases of memory shortage.

In principle, the RGB->CMY(K) transformation is of benefit to continuous tone
printers (eg. dye sublimation), as well as the more common plain bitmap
(usually inkjet) printers. However, PDumperSpt currently only undertakes the
RGB->CMY(K) transformation as part of its halftoning or diffusing support for
non continuous tone printers. This may or may not change in a future release.


Overview of parameters
----------------------

The parameters of the RGB->CMY(K) transformation are introduced here in terms
of their general function. Refer to the section below for detailed definitions
of each parameter.

- gamma correction
Gamma correction provides a reasonable compensation for non-linear ink
behaviour (primarily dot gain). The gamma correction of each of the four inks
is separately adjustable, but typically all four would be similar.

- brightness and contrast
Brightness and contrast are provided as parameters for convenience. In
addition, brightness is split into two values; one for error diffused output,
and one for halftoned. Typically the brightness value will be set higher for
error diffused, so that the perceived brightness can be matched with that for
halftones. 

- grey component replacement (GCR)
Grey component replacement controls the use of K (black) ink for the grey
component of any given colour. There are two pairs of parameters; one pair
controls how much of the grey component is removed from CMY, the other controls
how much is generated in K. Typically, significantly less than 100% GCR is
desirable in order to avoid lack of colour, or a grainy appearance. For a 3 ink
(CMY) printer, the GCR parameters are redundant.

- colour correction
Colour correction adjusts the proportions of inks combined to represent ranges
of colours, to compensate for ink imperfections. Overall colour balance can be
set by adjusting the relative strengths of the individual inks. The colour
balance of each of the three possible pairs of colour inks (MY, CY, CM) is also
independently adjustable. For example, the typical tendency of C and M inks
in combination to produce purple-blues (instead of blues) can be adjusted,
without affecting other combinations or overall colour balance.

- ink density
An ink density of 100% would just be the setting of all dots for that ink, over
some area. Control of maximum printed ink density is important for most printers.
Although 100% may be correct for an extended area using one ink, the combination
of two or three inks will often require reduced densities, in order to control
the total volume of ink on the paper. Symptoms of excessive ink density include
muddy colours, fuzzy detail and wet paper! Some high resolution printers may
require significant density reduction, even for single inks. Parameters are
provided for one, two and three ink density control.


Using prpalgen
--------------

The printer palettes reside in a resource directory, Palettes. For disc based
!Printers, this is simply inside !Printers. For ROM based !Printers, some
palettes may be in ROM but any updated palettes will appear in the !Printers
choices directory, which is typically !Boot.Choices.Printers. prpalgen creates
or reads text files which specify the required parameters. These files are
given the same name (number) as their corresponding palette, and reside in
Palettes.Params.

The palette or palettes of interest for a particular printer can be identified
by examining the graphics modes of the printer definition file with !PrintEdit.
Note that editing a palette will affect other similar printers whose definitions
refer to the same palette number. Often this is not a problem, because only
one printer of a similar class will be used. If desired, the palette to be
edited can be copied to an unused number, and the printer definition file
modified appropriately.

To use prpalgen, proceed as follows:

1) Run !Printers, if it is not yet running. This sets some paths which prpalgen
   needs.

2) To read the current parameters from the palette, run prpalgen (eg. in
   a task window) with:

       prpalgen -r <palette number>

   This creates a text file of parameters, and reports its full pathname.

3) Open up the given directory and load the text file into your favourite
   editor.

4) Edit the parameter values as required and resave the file. Edit only
   the values, or the comments at the top; do not edit the value names.

5) To update the palette from the new parameters, run prpalgen with:

       prpalgen -u <palette number>

   This may take a few seconds.

In general, the new palette is operative immediately after step 5, and can
be tested (assuming that !Printers has selected the correct printer and
graphics mode to use it). If further adjustments are made, then just steps
4 and 5 need be repeated. Sometimes when a palette is first updated,
!Printers must be quit and restarted to activate the changes; prpalgen
gives a warning in these cases. (The two cases are: use of an old format
palette, and use of a palette currently in ROM).

prpalgen cannot be used to create an entirely new palette. However, you can
easily copy a current palette to a new number, and then modify it as above. In
addition, prpalgen will accept old format palettes (as output by the palette
editor !Repro). In this case the -r option will create a set of default
parameters only, and the -u option will automatically promote the palette to
the new format. The new !Printers cannot use the old format palettes until they
have been promoted.


Definition of parameters
------------------------

The prpalgen parameters are defined in detail here, named as they appear in
the parameter text files. Each parameter name is followed by its units, its
total range and a rough indication of typical range. Where several parameters
are grouped with one name, the values must be separated by spaces only.

- error diff density -   units: %   range: 1-100   typical: 50-100
Scales the maximum single ink density when in error diffused mode. Usually this
is just set to 100. For a printer which requires substantial single ink
density reduction, this value can be set appropriately, instead of reducing
the general single ink parameters (1-ink depletion - see below). The advantage
of this is that it avoids quantisation errors associated with the reduced ink
range. In this case, halftone modes should be disabled in the printer definition
file. This is unlikely to be a serious restriction since halftoning is likely
to produce poor results with low density anyway.

- bright -   units: none   range: 0.1 to 10   typical: 0.7 to 1.5
Sets the nominal perceived brightness. The two values are for error diffused
mode (first) and halftone mode (second). Typically, an error diffused value
greater than the halftone value will give similar perceived brightness. A
value of 1 is neutral. If only one value is specified, it applies to both
modes.

- contrast -   units: none   range: 0.1 to 10   typical: 0.8 to 1.2
Sets the nominal perceived contrast. A value of 1 is neutral.

- red adjust M-Y -    units: %   range -50 to 50   typical: -25 to 25
Adjusts the balance of the two-ink component of a colour in the case where
it is red (M and Y). A value of 0 is neutral; a positive value (of M-Y)
weakens Y relative to M; a negative value weakens M relative to Y.

- green adjust C-Y -   units: %   range -50 to 50   typical: -25 to 25
Adjusts the balance of the two-ink component of a colour in the case where
it is green (C and Y). A value of 0 is neutral; a positive value (of C-Y)
weakens Y relative to C; a negative value weakens C relative to Y.

- blue adjust C-M -   units: %   range -50 to 50   typical: -25 to 25
Adjusts the balance of the two-ink component of a colour in the case where
it is blue (C and M). A value of 0 is neutral; a positive value (of C-M)
weakens M relative to C; a negative value weakens C relative to M.

- ink gamma(s) -   units: none   range: 0.1 to 10   typical: 1.5 to 2.5
Sets the gamma corrections of the four inks. The four values are for
C,M,Y,K respectively. If only one value is specified, it applies to all inks.
Note that the K value refers to K ink used for a pure grey; K ink used by
a general colour will be influenced by the CMY gammas (and the black
generate function).

- black GCR -   units: %   range: 0 to 100   typical: 50 to 100
Sets the amount of the grey component of a colour that is removed from
CMY. If only one value is specified, it sets the proportion removed for a grey
component that is halfway between black and white, and the removal varies
non-linearly up to 100% for a full black component. The second parameter, if
specified, scales the removal function such that the second parameter defines
the maximum proportion removed, at full black. For a three ink printer, these
parameters should be set to: 0 100.

- black generate -   units: %   range: 0 to 100   typical 50 to 100
Sets the amount of the grey component of a colour that is generated as K.
If only one value is specified, it sets the proportion generated for a grey
component that is halfway between black and white, and the generation varies
non-linearly up to 100% for a full black component. The second parameter, if
specified, scales the generation function such that the second parameter
defines the maximum proportion generated, at full black. For a three ink
printer, these parameters should be set to: 0 100.

- black min-non-zero -   units: none   range: 0 to 255   typical: 0 to 4
Sets the minimum non-zero value to be assigned to the K generation function.
A value of 0 or 1 imposes no restriction. A value greater than 1 causes lesser
K values to be switched back into CMY. This has the effect of reducing the
perceived contamination of colours that have small grey component, by sparse
black dots. Only small values are sensible. 

- 1-ink depletion -   units: %   range: 0 to 100   typical: 80 to 100
Sets the single ink density reduction. The four values are for C,M,Y,K
respectively. Small relative differences can be used to provide for overall
colour correction. A value of 100% means full density. A substantial single
ink density reduction is better implemented in the error diff density
parameter (see above). Note that the K value refers to K ink used by a pure
grey; K ink used by a general colour will be influenced by the CMY densities
(and the black generate function).

- 2-ink depletion -   units: %   range: 0 to 100   typical: 60 to 100
Sets the ink density reduction (compounded with the 1-ink depletion) for
the two-ink component of a colour (MY, CY or CM). This can be used to
compensate for the extra volume of two inks. A value of 100% means no
two-ink density reduction.

- 3-ink depletion -   units: %   range: 0 to 100   typical 60 to 100
Sets the ink density reduction (compounded with the 1-ink depletion) for
the three-ink component of a colour (grey as CMY). This can be used to
compensate for the extra volume of three inks. A value of 100% means no
three-ink density reduction.


Advice on parameter tuning
--------------------------

Although the parameters control well-defined aspects of the RGB->CMY(K)
transformation, their influence on the perceived quality of printing with
imperfect inks and papers is less clearly defined. Hence, some experimentation
and some experience are required. This section gives some general advice which
may be helpful. Apologies for any comments which seem obvious or patronising.

Avoid tuning the parameters for one picture or one graphic. If possible,
select a range of images which you believe to be 'neutral' in themselves,
possibly combined with graphics and text. For bitmap images in particular,
some sources are better corrected by an application, rather than falsely
tuning the printer driver to compensate.

This advice particularly applies to ink jet printers, which are relatively
sensitive to paper quality. Different papers will often have a significant
effect. Certainly, the difference between coated and plain paper can be
dramatic, but even 'similar' paper grades may give significant differences.
Realise that printing on poor paper cannot be tuned to the quality of that on
good paper.

It may be easier to copy one of the current palettes for adjustment. However,
if you wish to set up from scratch, it is probably best to start with neutral
parameters and work through, roughly in the order: gamma correction, ink
density, GCR and colour correction. Guess the gamma correction at, say, 2.
It is advisable to tune initially with error diffused mode (which better
reflects the parameters - see below), then fix the final relative brightness
for halftones.

Some experimentation may be required to identify the parameters which should
be adjusted for given quality symptoms. For example, dark, muddy printing may
require adjustment of gamma correction, ink densities or perhaps GCR. Setting
one parameter correctly may reveal others which need adjusting. For example,
colour correction and 3-ink density are likely to be more critical when GCR
is reduced from 100%

There is no primary control for colour strength or saturation. However, for
a 4-ink printer (CMYK), reducing the black generate function relative to the
black GCR will have a colour enhancing effect. This can generally be exploited
over a useful range, whilst maintaining sensible GCR and generate settings for
black ink use.

For a 3-ink printer (CMY), leave each of the black GCR and black generate
parameter pairs at "0 100". In this case, control of colour enhancement can
be achieved through the 3-ink depletion parameter. However, the latter will
primarily be required to control over-inking of greys and blacks.

The choice between error diffused and halftoned modes is often assumed to be a
matter of personal taste. However, there are technical reasons why error
diffused mode should often give superior results. The error diffused mode is
inherently better able to handle most adjusted palettes than is the halftone
mode; in particular, where substantial ink density reduction or colour
correction are involved. This is because the error diffused mode compensates,
dot by dot, for differences between colours it desired and colours the
printer/palette allowed. The halftone mode essentially selects the closest
halftone setting, then forgets any discrepancy. Hence you should find error
diffused mode to be generally the mode of choice.


---

mjs/1/20-Jul-95
