
Read_Me file for Integrex printers.
-----------------------------------

The "Integrex.Coljet132" printer definition file
is for use with the  Integrex Colourjet 132
printer. This definition is unlikely to work with
any other printer, unless the printer provides an
Integrex Colourjet 132 emulation mode. ISO Latin 1
text character mappings are provided, using the
unusual selection of top bit set characters
available on the Colourjet 132. Backspace
overprinting is not used, as the Colourjet 132
cannot backspace. The range of fancy text
highlights supported is reasonable. There are only
three graphics resolutions, and the highest one
(160 by 252 DPI) is unlikely to be useful since it
is very slow and it tends to put too much ink onto
the paper.

Note that you need firmware revision 9.14 or later
in your Colourjet 132 or you may encounter
problems with text printing. To check your
firmware revision, switch the printer on while
holding down the LF button. Contact Integrex if
you need a firmware upgrade.

The "Integrex.ColJet2000" printer definition file
is for use with the Integrex Colourjet 2000
printer. The range of fancy text highlights is
limited on this printer. The ISO Latin 1 text
character mappings are good since the printer is
HP PaintJet compatible and therefore has most of
the Latin 1 character set built in. There are only
two graphics resolutions (90 and 180 DPI) but both
of them are perfectly usable.

There is a problem with graphics printing on the
Colourjet 2000 with firmware revision 1.02.
Sometimes the output on the paper is inverted ie.
black prints as white and vice versa. If this
happens, press Escape (to stop printing) and
switch the printer off and back on again. Print
your document again. This time it will probably be
printed correctly. To check your firmware
revision, switch the printer on while holding down
the LF button. If you think you need a firmware
upgrade you should contact Integrex.

The Colourjet 2000 functions better when driven
exclusively as an HP PaintJet compatible printer.
You should check with your dealer or third party
software vendors about availability of software to
drive the printer in this manner.
