
Notes on the Audio Panel, by Leonardo Fei
-----------------------------------------


The Audio Panel is at any time in one of two 'working modes', specifically
the NORMAL play mode and the PROGRAM play mode.

As soon as you start it, the AP is in normal mode.  It only gets into 
program mode when you use its memory programming functions (i.e. click the
ALL or MEM or RND buttons, followed by PLAY).

When the AP is in program mode, the following restrictions apply:

- the slider and the slider bar cannot be dragged or clicked on.

- the time display will show only the elapsed track time.

- the main AP window must be open to allow the programmed track sequence
  to be played.  If the main window is closed, the AP will pause at the 
  end of each track and wait for it to be opened before continuing.

When the program memory is emptied (by clicking ADJUST on the CLR button
or highlighting all the programmed tracks and clicking SELECT on the CLR
button) the AP will abort the currently playing track, if any, reset the
drive and go back to normal mode.

Note the different behaviour of the ALL and RND buttons:

- ALL will append an ascending ordered list of all the audio tracks 
  available on the disc to whatever might already be in the program
  memory.

- RND will clear the contents of the memory before creating a randomly
  ordered list of all the audio tracks available on the disc.
  A differently ordered list will be created each time RND is selected.

When playing a mixed-mode disc (interleaved audio and data tracks), the use
of the ALL button will guarrantee that all the audio tracks on that disc
will be played, otherwise the drive normally stops when it encounters a data track, even if there are audio tracks after the data one.

The REPEAT function activated by selecting the RPT button has the following
effect, depending whether the AP is in normal or in program play mode:

- when in normal mode, the playback will not stop after the last track on 
  the disc, but will flip around to the beginning of the disc and continue
  like this forever (or until interrupted by human intervention or lack of
  power supply).

- when in program mode, the playback will not stop after the last track in
  the program memory, but will filp around to the beginning of the program
  and continue forever.

- in both modes, selecting SKIP BACKWARD or SKIP FORWARD will loop 
  in the disc space or in the program space, according to the mode
  currently active.

Each Audio Panel instance can be used to control a single CD-ROM drive at
one time.  If you are using more than one drive or if your drive dip-switch 
settings and/or SCSI card position in the expansion is different from the
default configuration (SCSI device 0, logical unit 0, expansion slot 0), 
you can use the AP setup menu to change it.

It is not advisable, though, to keep switching the AP from one drive
to another through the use of the setup window.  This operation should 
therefore be performed only at the beginning.  If you need to control
more than one drive you should start the AP application as many times
as you require and change their setup individually soon after.

